  Act One
Two ELIZABETHANS passing time in a place without any visible character. They are well-dressed - hats, cloaks,
sticks and all. Each of them has a large leather money bag. Guildenstern's bag is nearly empty. Rosencrantz's bag
is nearly full. The reason being: they are betting on the toss of a coin, in the following manner: Guildenstern
(hereafter 'GUIL') takes a coin out of his bag, spins it, letting it fall. Rosencrantz (hereafter 'ROS') studies it,
announces it as "heads" (as it happens) and puts it into his own bag. Then they repeat the process. They have
apparently been doing it for some time. The run of "heads" is impossible, yet ROS betrays no surprise at all -
he feels none. However he is nice enough to feel a little embarrassed attaking so much money off his friend. Let
that be his character note. GUIL is well alive to the oddity of it. He is not worried about the money, but he is
worried by the implications ; aware but not going to panic about it - his character note.
GUIL sits. ROS stands (he does the moving, retrieving coins).
GUIL spins. ROS studies coin.
 ROS: Heads.
 (He picks it up and puts it in his money bag. The process is repeated.)
 Heads.
 (Again.)
 ROS: Heads.
 (Again.)
 Heads.
 (Again.)
 Heads.
 GUIL (flipping a coin): There is an art to the building up of suspense.
 ROS: Heads.
 GUIL (flipping another): Though it can be done by luck alone.
 ROS: Heads.
 GUIL: If that's the word I'm after.
 ROS (raises his head at GUIL): Seventy-six love.
 (GUIL gets up but has nowhere to go. He spins another coin over his shoulder without looking at it, his
 attention being directed at his environment or lack of it.)
 Heads.
 GUIL: A weaker man might be moved to re-examine his faith, if in nothing else at least in the law of
 probability.
 (He slips a coin over his shoulder as he goes to look upstage.)
 ROS: Heads.
 (GUIL, examining the confines of the stage, flips over two more coins, as he does so, one by one of course. ROS
 announces each of them as "heads".)
 GUIL (musing): The law of probability, as it has been oddly asserted, is something to do with the proposition
 that if six monkeys (he has surprised himself)... if six monkeys were...
 ROS: Game?
 GUIL: Were they?
 ROS: Are you?
 GUIL (understanding): Games. (Flips a coin.) The law of averages, if I have got this right, means that if six
 monkeys were thrown up in the air for long enough they would land on their tails about as often as they would land
 on their -
 ROS: Heads. (He picks up the coin.)
 GUIL: Which at first glance does not strike one as a particularly rewarding speculation, in either sense, even
 without the monkeys. I mean you wouldn't bet on it. I mean I would, but you wouldn't... (As he flips a coin.)
 ROS: Heads.
 GUIL: Would you? (Flips a coin.)
 ROS: Heads.
 (Repeat.)
 Heads. (He looks up at GUIL - embarrassed laugh.) Getting a bit of a bore, isn't it?
 GUIL (coldly): A bore?
 ROS: Well...
 GUIL: What about suspense?
 ROS (innocently): What suspense?
 (Small pause.)
 GUIL: It must be the law of diminishing returns... I feel the spell about to be broken. (Energising himself
 somewhat.)
 (He takes out a coin, spins it high, catches it, turns it over on to the back of his other hand, studies the coin –
 and tosses it to ROS. His energy deflates and he sits.)
 Well, it was a even chance... if my calculations are correct.
 ROS: Eighty-five in a row - beaten the record!
 GUIL: Don't be absurd.
 ROS: Easily!
 GUIL (angry): Is the it, then? Is that all?
 ROS: What?
 GUIL: A new record? Is that as far as you prepared to go?
 ROS: Well...
 GUIL: No questions? Not even a pause?
 ROS: You spun it yourself.
 GUIL: Not a flicker of doubt?
 ROS (aggrieved, aggressive): Well, I won - didn't I?
 GUIL (approaches him - quieter): And if you'd lost? If they'd come down against you, eighty -five times, one after
 another, just like that?
 ROS (dumbly): Eighty-five in a row? Tails?
 GUIL: Yes! What would you think?
 ROS (doubtfully): Well... (Jocularly.) Well, I'd have a good look at your coins for a start!
 GUIL (retiring): I'm relieved. At least we can still count on self-interest as a predictable factor... I suppose
 it's the last to go. Your capacity for trust made me wonder if perhaps... you, alone...
 (He turns on him suddenly, reaches out a hand.) Touch.
 (ROS claps his hand. GUIL pulls him up to him.)
 (More intensely): We have been spinning coins together since - (He releases him almost as violently.) This is
 not the first time we spun coins!
 ROS: Oh no - we've been spinning coins for as long as I remember.
 GUIL: How long is that?
 ROS: I forget. Mind you - eighty-five times!
 GUIL: Yes?
 ROS: It'll take some time beating, I imagine.
 GUIL: Is that what you imagine? Is that it? No fear?
 ROS: Fear?
 GUIL (in fury - flings a coin on the ground): Fear! The crack that might flood your brain with light!
 ROS: Heads... (He puts it in his bag.)
 (GUIL sits despondently. He takes a coin, spins it, lets it fall between his feet. He looks at it, picks it up;
 throws it to ROS, who puts it in his bag.)
 (GUIL takes another coin, spins it, catches it, turns it over on to his other hand, looks at it, and throws it to ROS
 who puts it in his bag.)
 (GUIL tales a third coin, spins it, catches it in his right hand, turns it over on to his loft wrist, lobs it in the air,
 catches it with his left hand, raises his left leg, throws the coin up under it, catches it and turns it over on to the
 top of his head, where it sits. ROS comes, looks at it, puts it in his bag.)
 ROS: I'm afraid -
 GUIL: So am I.
 ROS: I'm afraid it isn't your day.
 GUIL: I'm afraid it is.
 (Small pause.)
 ROS: Eighty-nine.
 GUIL: It must be indicative of something, besides the redistribution of wealth. (He muses.) List of possible
 explanations. One: I'm willing it. Inside where nothing shows, I'm the essence of a man spinning double-headed
 coins, and betting against himself in private atonement for an unremembered past. (He spins a coin at ROS.)
 ROS: Heads.
 GUIL: Two: time has stopped dead, and a single experience of one coin being spun once has been repeated
 ninety times... (He flips a coin, looks at it, tosses it to ROS.) On the whole, doubtful. Three: divine intervention,
that is to say, a good turn from above concerning him, cf. children of Israel, or retribution from above concerning
me, cf. Lot's wife. Four: a spectacular vindication of the principle that each individual coin spun individually (he
spins one) is as likely to come down heads as tails and therefore should cause no surprise that each individual
time it does. (It does. He tosses it to ROS.)
 ROS: I've never known anything like it!
 GUIL: And syllogism: One, he has never known anything like it. Two: he has never known anything to write
home about. Three, it's nothing to write home about... Home... What's the first thing you remember?
 ROS: Oh, let's see...The first thing that comes into my head, you mean?
 GUIL: No - the first thing you remember.
 ROS: Ah. (Pause.) No, it's no good, it's gone. It was a long time ago.
 GUIL (patient but edged): You don't get my meaning. What is the first thing after all the things you've forgotten?
 ROS: Oh. I see. (Pause.) I've forgotten the question.
 GUIL: How long have you suffered from a bad memory?
 ROS: I can't remember.
 (GUIL paces.)
 GUIL: Are you happy?
 ROS: What?
 GUIL: Content? At ease?
 ROS: I suppose so.
 GUIL: What are you going to do now?
 ROS: I don't know. What do you want to do?
 GUIL: I have no desires. None. (He stops pacing dead.) There was a messenger... that's right. We were sent
for. (He wheels at ROS and raps out.) Syllogism the second: one: probability is a factor which operates
within natural forces. Two, probability is not operating as a factor. Three, we are now within un-, sub- or
supernatural forces. Discuss. (ROS is suitably startled - Acidly.) Not too heatedly.
 ROS: I'm sorry, I - What's the matter with you?
 GUIL: A scientific approach to the examination of phenomena is a defence against the pure emotion of fear.
Keep tight hold and continue while there's time. Now - counter to the previous syllogism: tricky one, follow me
carefully, it may prove a comfort. If we postulate, and we just have, that within un-, sub- or supernatural forces the
probability is that the law of probability will not operate as a factor, then we must accept that the
probability of the first part will not operate as a factor, in which case the law of probability will operate as a factor
within un-, sub- or supernatural forces. And since it obviously hasn't been doing so, we can take it that we are
not held within un-, sub- or supernatural forces after all; in all probability, that is. Which is a great relief to me
personally. (Small pause.) Which is all very well, except that - (He continues with tight hysteria, under control.)
We have been spinning coins together since I don't know when, and in all that time (if it is all that time) I don't
suppose either of us was more than a couple of gold pieces up or down. I hope that doesn't sound surprising
because it's very unsurprisingness is something I am trying to keep hold of. The equanimity of your average
pitcher and tosser of coins depends upon a law, or rather a tendency, or let us say a probability, or at any rate a
mathematically calculable chance, which ensures that he will not upset himself by losing too much nor upset
his opponent by winning too often. This made for a kind of harmony and a kind of confidence. It related the
fortuitous and ordained into a reassuring union which we recognised as nature. The sun came up about as often as
it went down, in the long run, and a coin showed heads about as often as it showed tails. Then a messenger
arrived. We had been sent for. Nothing else happened. Ninety-two coins sun consecutively have come down heads
ninety-two consecutive times... and for the last three minutes on the wind of a windless day I have heard the
sound of drums and flute...
 ROS (cutting his fingernails): Another curious scientific phenomenon is the fact that the fingernails grow after
death, as does the beard.
 GUIL: What?
 ROS (loud): Beard!
 GUIL: But you're not dead.
 ROS (irritated): I didn't say they started to grow after death! (Pause, calmer.) The fingernails also grow before
birth, though not the beard.
 GUIL: What?
 ROS (shouts): Beard! What's the matter with you? (Reflectively.) The toenails, on the other hand, never grow at
all.
 GUIL (bemused): The toenails never grow at all?
 ROS: Do they? It's a funny thing - I cut my fingernails all the time, and every time I think to cut them, they need
cutting. Now, for instance. And yet, I never, to the best of my knowledge, cut my toenails. They ought to be curled
under my feet by now, but it doesn't happen. I never think about them. Perhaps I cut them absent-mindedly,
when I'm thinking of something else.
 GUIL (tensed up by this rambling): Do you remember the first thing that happen today?
 ROS (promptly): I woke up, I suppose. (Triggered.) Oh - I've got it now - that man, a foreigner, he woke us up -
 GUIL: A messenger. (He relaxes, sits.)
 ROS: That's it - pale sky before dawn, a man standing on his saddle to bang on the shutters - shouts - What's all
the row about?! Clear off! – but then he called our names. You remember that - this man woke us up.
 GUIL: Yes.
 ROS: We were sent for.
 GUIL: Yes.
 ROS: That's why we're here. (He looks round, seems doubtful, then the explanation.) Travelling.
 GUIL: Yes.
 ROS (dramatically): It was urgent - a matter of extreme urgency, a royal summons, his very words: official
business and no questions asked - lights in the stable-yard; saddle up and off headlong and hotfoot across the
land, our guides outstripped in breakneck pursuit of our duty! Fearful lest we come too late.
 (Small pause.)
 GUIL: Too late for what?
 ROS: How do I know? We haven't got there yet.
 GUIL: Then what are we doing here, I ask myself.
 ROS: You might well ask.
 GUIL: We better get on.
 ROS: You might well think.
 GUIL: Without much conviction; we better get on.
 ROS (actively): Right! (Pause.) On where?
 GUIL: Forward.
 ROS (forward to footlights): Ah. (Hesitates.) Which way do we - (He turns round.) Which way did we - ?
 GUIL: Practically starting from scratch... An awakening, a man standing on his saddle to bang on the shutters,
our names shouted in a certain dawn, a message, a summons... A new record for pitch and toss. We have not
been.. picked out... simply to be abandoned... set loose to find our own way... We are entitled to some direction... I
would have thought.
 ROS (alert, listening): I say - ! I say -
 (GUIL rises himself.)
 GUIL: Yes?
 ROS: Like a band. (He looks around, laughs embarrassedly, expiating himself.) It sounded like - a band.
Drums.
 GUIL: Yes.
 ROS (relaxes): It couldn't have been real.
 GUIL: "The colours red, blue and green are real. The colour yellow is a mystical experience shared by everybody"
- demolish.
 ROS (at edge of stage): It must have been thunder. Like drums...
 (By the end of the next speech, the band is faintly audible.)
 GUIL: A man breaking his journey between one place and another at a third place of no name, character,
population or significance, sees a unicorn cross his path and disappear. That in itself is startling, but there
are precedents for mystical encounters of various kinds, or to be less extreme, a choice of persuasions to put it
down to fancy; until - "My God," says the second man, "I must be dreaming, I thought I saw a unicorn." At
which point, a dimension is added that makes the experience as alarming as it will ever be. A third witness, you
understand, adds no further dimension but only spreads it thinner, and a fourth thinner still, and the more
witnesses there are, the thinner it gets and the more reasonable it becomes until it is as thin as reality, the name we
give to the common experience... "Look, look" recites the crowd. "A horse with an arrow in its forehead! It
must have been mistaken for a deer."
 ROS (eagerly): I knew all along it was a band.
 GUIL (tiredly): He knew all along it was a band.
 ROS: Here they come!
 GUIL (at the last moment before they enter - wistfully): I'm sorry it wasn't the unicorn. It would have been nice to
have unicorns.
 (The TRAGEDIANS are six in number, including a small BOY(ALFRED). Two pull a cart piled up with props and
belongings. There is also a DRUMMER, a HORN-PLAYER and a FLAUTIST. The SPOKESMAN ("the PLAYER")
has no instrument. He brings up the rear and is the first to notice them.)
 PLAYER: Halt!
 (The GROUP turns and halts.)
 (Joyously.) An audience!
 (ROS and GUIL half rise.)
 Don't move!
 (They sink back. He regards them fondly.)
 Perfect! A lucky thing we came along.
 ROS: For us?
 PLAYER: Let us hope so. But to meet two gentlemen on the road – we would not hope to meet them off it.
 ROS: No?
 PLAYER: Well met, in fact, and just in time.
 ROS: Why's that?
 PLAYER: Why, we grow rusty and you catch us at the very point of decadence - by this time tomorrow we
might have forgotten everything we ever knew. That's a thought, isn't it? (He laughs generously.) We'd be back
where we started - improvising.
 ROS: Tumblers, are you?
 PLAYER: We can give you a tumble if that's your taste and times being what they are... Otherwise, for a jingle
of coin we can do you a selection of gory romances, full of fine cadence and corpses, pirated from Italian;
and it doesn't take much to make a jingle - even a single coin has music in it.
 (They ALL flourish and bow, raggedly.)
 Tragedians, at your command.
 (ROS and GUIL have got to their feet.)
 ROS: My name is Guildenstern, and this is Rosencrantz.
 (GUIL confers briefly with him.)
 (Without embarrassment.) I'm sorry - his name's Guildenstern, and I'm Rosencrantz.
 PLAYER: A pleasure. We've played to bigger, of course, but quality counts for something. I recognised you at
once -
 ROS: And who are we?
 PLAYER: - as fellow artists.
 ROS: I thought we were gentlemen.
 PLAYER: For some of us it is performance, for others, patronage. They are two sides of the same coin, or, let
us say, being as there are so many of us, the same side of two coins. (Bows again.) Don't clap too loudly -
it's a very old world.
 ROS: What is your line?
 PLAYER: Tragedy, sir. Deaths and disclosures, universal and particular, denouements both unexpected and
inexorable, transvestite melodrama on all levels including the suggestive. We transport you into the world of
intrigue and illusion... clowns, if you like, murderers - we can do you ghosts and battles, on the skirmish levels,
heroes, villains, tormented lovers - set pieces in the poetic vein; we can do you rapiers or rape or both, by all
means, faithless wives and ravished virgins - flagrante delicto at a price, but that comes under realism for which
there are special terms. Getting warm, am I?
 ROS (doubtfully): Well, I don't know...
 PLAYER: It costs little to watch, and little more if you happen to get caught up in the action, if that's you taste and
times being what they are.
 ROS: What are they?
 PLAYER: Indifferent.
 ROS: Bad?
 PLAYER: Wicked. Now what precisely is your pleasure? (He turns to the TRAGEDIANS.) Gentlemen, disport
yourselves. (The TRAGEDIANS shuffle into some kind of a line.) There! See anything you like?
 ROS (doubtful, innocent): What do they do?
 PLAYER: Let your imagination run riot. They are beyond surprise.
 ROS: And how much?
 PLAYER: To take part?
 ROS: To watch.
 PLAYER: Watch what?
 ROS: A private performance.
 PLAYER: How private?
 ROS: Well, there are only two of us. Is that enough?
 PLAYER: For an audience, disappointing. For voyeurs, about average.
 ROS: What's the difference?
 PLAYER: Ten guilders.
 ROS (horrified): Ten guilders!
 PLAYER: I mean eight.
 ROS: Together?
 PLAYER: Each. I don't think you understand -
 ROS: What are you saying?
 PLAYER: What am I saying - seven.
 ROS: Where have you been?
 PLAYER: Roundabout. A nest of children carries the custom of the town. Juvenile companies, they are the
fashion. But they cannot match our repertoire... we'll stoop to anything if that's your bent... (He regards ROS
meaningfully but ROS returns the stare blankly.)
 ROS: They'll row up.
 PLAYER (giving up): There's one being born every minute. (To
TRAGEDIANS.) On-ward!
 (The TRAGEDIANS start to resume their burdens and their journey. GUIL
stirs himself at last.)
 GUIL: Where are you going?
 PLAYER: Ha-alt!
 (They halt and turn.)
 Home, sir.
 GUIL: Where from?
 PLAYER: Home. We're travelling people. We take our chances where we find them.
 GUIL: It was the chance, then?
 PLAYER: Chance?
 GUIL: You found us.
 PLAYER: Oh yes.
 GUIL: You were looking?
 PLAYER: Oh no.
 GUIL: Chance, then.
 PLAYER: Or fate.
 GUIL: Yours or ours?
 PLAYER: It could hardly be one without the other.
 GUIL: Fate, then.
 PLAYER: Oh, yes. We have no control. Tonight we play to the court. Or the night after. Or to the tavern. Or not.
 GUIL: Perhaps I can use my influence.
 PLAYER: At the tavern?
 GUIL: At the court. I would say I have some influence.
 PLAYER: Would you say so?
 GUIL: I have influence yet.
 PLAYER: Yet what?
 (GUIL seizes the PLAYER violently.)
 GUIL: I have influence!
 (The PLAYER does not resist. GUIL loosens his hold.)
 (More calmly.) You said something - about getting caught up in the action -
 PLAYER (gaily freeing himself): I did! - I did! - You're quicker than your friend... (Confidingly.) Now for a handful
of guilders I happen to have a private and uncut performance of the Rape of the Sabine Women - or rather
woman, or rather Alfred - (Over his shoulder.) Get your skirt on, Alfred - (The BOY starts struggling into a female
robe.) ... and for eight you can participate. (GUIL backs, PLAYER follows.) ... taking either part. (GUIL
backs.) ... or both for ten. (GUIL tries to turn away, PLAYER holds his sleeve.) ... with encores - (GUIL
smashes the PLAYER across the face. The PLAYER recoils. GUIL stands trembling.) (Resigned and quiet.)
Get your skirt off, Alfred... (ALFRED struggles out of his half-on robe.)
 GUIL (shaking with rage and fright): It could have been - it didn't have to be obscene... It could have been - a
bird out of season, dropping bright-feathered on my shoulder... It could have been a tongueless dwarf
standing by the road to point the way... I was prepared. But it's this, isn't it? No enigma, no dignity, nothing
classical, portentous, only this - a comic pornographer and a rabble of prostitutes...
 PLAYER (acknowledging the description with a sweep of his hat, bowing: sadly): You should have caught us in
better times. We were purists then. (Straightens up.) On-ward.
 (The PLAYERS make to leave.)
 ROS (his voice has changed: he has caught on): Excuse me!
 PLAYER: Ha-alt!
 (They halt.)
 A-al-l-fred!
 (ALFRED resumes the struggle. The PLAYER comes forward.)
 ROS: You're not - ah - exclusively players, then?
 PLAYER: We're inclusively players, sir.
 ROS: So you give - exhibitions?
 PLAYER: Performances, sir.
 ROS: Yes, of course. There's more money in that, is there?
 PLAYER: There's more trade, sir.
 ROS: Times being what they are.
 PLAYER: Yes.
 ROS: Indifferent.
 PLAYER: Completely.
 ROS: You know I'd no idea -
 PLAYER: No -
 ROS: I mean, I've heard of - but I've never actually -
 PLAYER: No.
 ROS: I mean, what exactly do you do?
 PLAYER: We keep to our usual stuff, more or less, only inside out. We do on stage the things that are
supposed to happen off. Which is a kind of integrity, if you look on every exit being an entrance somewhere else.
 ROS (nervy, loud): Well, I'm not really the type of man who - no, but don't hurry off - sit down and tell us about
some of the things people ask you to do -
 (The PLAYER turns away.)
 PLAYER: On-ward!
 ROS: Just a minute!
 (They turn and look at him without expression.)
 Well, all right - I wouldn't mind seeing - just an idea of the kind of - (bravely). What will you do for that? (And
tosses a single coin on the ground between them.)
 (The PLAYER spits at the coin from where he stands.)
 PLAYER (to ROS, coldly): Leave it lying there. Perhaps when we come
back this way we'll be that muck cheaper.
 (The TRAGEDIANS demur, trying to get the coin. He kicks and cuffs them back.)
 On!
 (ALFRED is still half in and half out of his robe. The PLAYER cuffs him.)
 (To ALFRED) What are you playing at?
 (ROS is shamed into fury.)
 ROS: Filth! Disgusting - oh, I know the kind of filth you trade in - I'll report you to the authorities - perverts! I
know your game all right, it's all filth!
 (The PLAYERS are about to leave. GUIL remained detached.)
 GUIL (casually): Do you like a bet?
 PLAYER: Ha-alt!
 (The TRAGEDIANS look interested. The PLAYER comes forward.)
 PLAYER: What kind of bet do you have in mind?
 (GUIL walks half the distance towards the PLAYER, stops with his foot over the coin.)
 GUIL: Double or quits.
 PLAYER: Well... heads.
 (GUIL raises his foot. The PLAYER bends. The TRAGEDIANS crowd round. Relief and congratulations. The
PLAYER picks up the coin. GUIL throws him a second coin.)
 GUIL: Again?
 (Some of the TRAGEDIANS are for it, others against. The PLAYER nods and tosses the coin.)
 GUIL: Heads.
 (It is. H picks it up.)
 Again.
 (GUIL spins the coin.)
 PLAYER: Heads.
 (It is. PLAYER picks up coin. He has two coins again. He spins one.)
 GUIL: Heads.
 (It is. GUIL picks it up. Then tosses immediately.)
 PLAYER (fractional hesitation): Tails.
 (But it's heads. GUIL picks it up. PLAYER tosses down his last coin by the way of paying it up, and turns away.
GUIL doesn't pick it up; he puts
his foot on it.)
 GUIL: Heads.
 PLAYER: No!
 (Pause. The TRAGEDIANS are against this.)
 (Apologetically.) They don't like the odds.
 GUIL: After six in a row? I'd say they were in your favor.
 PLAYER: No.
 GUIL (lifts his foot; squats; picks up the coin still squatting; looks up): You were right - heads. (Spins it, slaps his
hand on it, on the floor.)
 Heads I win.
 PLAYER: No.
 GUIL (uncovers coin): Right again. (Repeat.) Heads I win.
 PLAYER: No.
 GUIL (uncovers coin): And right again. (Repeat.) Heads I win.
 PLAYER: No!
 (He turns away, the TRAGEDIANS with him. GUIL stands up, comes close.)
 GUIL: Would you believe it? (Stands back, relaxes, smiles.) Bet me the year of my birth doubled is an odd
number.
 PLAYER: Your birth - !
 GUIL: If you don't trust me don't bet with me.
 PLAYER: Would you trust me?
 GUIL: Bet me then.
 PLAYER: My birth?
 GUIL: Odd numbers you win.
 PLAYER: You're on -
 (The TRAGEDIANS have come forward, wide awake.)
 GUIL: Good. Year of your birth. Double it. Even numbers I win, odd numbers I lose. (Silence. An awful
sigh as the TRAGEDIANS realise that any number doubled is even. Then a terrible row as they object. Then a
terrible silence.)
 PLAYER: We have no money.
 (GUIL turns to him.)
 GUIL: Ah. Then what have you got?
 (The PLAYER silently brings ALFRED forward. GUIL regards ALFRED sadly.)
 Was it for this?
 PLAYER: It's the best we've got.
 GUIL (looking up and around): Then the times are bad indeed.
 (The PLAYER starts to speak, protestation, but GUIL turns on him viciously.)
 The very air stinks.
 (The PLAYER moves back. GUIL moves down to the footlight and turns.)
 Come here, Alfred.
 (ALFRED moves down and stands, frightened and small.)
 (Gently): Do you lose often?
 Alfred: Yes, sir.
 GUIL: Then what could you have to lose?
 Alfred: Nothing, sir.
 (Pause. GUIL regards him.)
 GUIL: Do you like being... an actor?
 Alfred: No, sir.
 (GUIL looks around him, at the audience.)
 GUIL: You and I, Alfred - we could create a dramatic precedent here.
 (And ALFRED, who has been near tears, starts to sniffle.)
 Come, come, Alfred, this is no way to fill the theatres of Europe.
 (The PLAYER has moved down, to remonstrate with ALFRED. GUIL cuts him off again.)
 (Viciously) Do you know any good plays?
 PLAYER: Plays?
 ROS (coming forward, flattering shyly): Exhibitions...
 GUIL: I thought you were actors.
 PLAYER (dawning): Oh. Oh, well, we are. We are. But there been much call -
 GUIL: You lost. Well, then - one of the Greeks, perhaps? You're familiar with the tragedies of antiquity, are
you? The great homicidal classics? Matri, patri, fratri, sorrori, uxori and it goes without saying -
 ROS: Saucy -
 GUIL: - Suicidal - hm? Maidens aspiring to godheads -
 ROS: And vice versa -
 GUIL: Your kind of thing, is it?
 PLAYER: Well, no, I can't say it is, really. We're more of the blood, love and rhetoric school.
 GUIL: Well, I'll leave the choice to you, if there is anything to choose between them.
 PLAYER: They're hardly divisible, sir - well, I can do you blood and love without rhetoric, and I can do you blood
and rhetoric without love, and I can do you all three concurrent or consecutive, but I can't do you love and rhetoric
without blood. Blood is compulsory - they're all blood, you see.
 GUIL: Is this what people want?
 PLAYER: It's what we do. (Small pause. He turns away.)
 (GUIL touches Alfred on the shoulder.)
 GUIL (wry, gentle): Thank you, we'll let you know.
 (The PLAYER has moved upstage. Alfred follows.)
 PLAYER (to TRAGEDIANS): Thirty-eight!
 ROS (moving across, fascinated and hopeful): Position?
 PLAYER: Sir?
 ROS: One of your - tableaux?
 PLAYER: No, sir.
 ROS: Oh.
 PLAYER (to TRAGEDIANS, now departing with their cart, already taking various props off it.) Entrances there
and there (indicating upstage).
 (The PLAYER has not moved his position for his last four lines. He does not move now. GUIL waits.)
 GUIL: Well... aren't you going to change into costume?
 PLAYER: I never change out, sir.
 GUIL: Always in character.
 PLAYER: That's it.
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: Aren't you going to - come on?
 PLAYER: I am on.
 GUIL: But if you are on, you can't come on. Can you?
 PLAYER: I start on.
 GUIL: But it hasn't started. Go on. We'll look out for you.
 PLAYER: I'll give you a wave.
 (He doesn't move. His immobility is now pointed and getting awkward. Pause. ROS walks up to him till they are
face to face.)
 ROS: Excuse me.
 (Pause. The PLAYER lifts his downstage foot. It was covering GUIL's coin. ROS puts his foot on the coin.
Smiles.)
 Thank you.
 (The PLAYER turns and goes. ROS has bent for the coin.)
 GUIL (moving out): Come on.
 ROS: I say - that was lucky.
 GUIL (turning): What?
 ROS: It was tails.
 (He tosses the coin to GUIL who catches it. Simultaneously - a lighting change sufficient to alter the exterior
mood into interior, but nothing violent.)
 And OPELIA runs on in some alarm, holding up her skirts - followed by HAMLET.
 Note: The resemblance between HAMLET and The PLAYER is superficial but noticeable.
 (OPHELIA has been sewing and she holds the garment. They are both mute.
HAMLET, with his doublet all unbraced, no hat upon his head, his stockings fouled, ungartered and double-gyved
to his ankle, pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other... and with a look so piteous, he takes her by the
wrist and holds her hard, then he goes to the length of his arm and with his other hand over his brow, falls to such
perusal of her face as he would draw it... At last, with a little shaking of his arm, and thrice his head waving
up and down, he raises a sigh so piteous and profound that it does seem to shatter all his bulk and end his being.
That done he lets her go, and with his head over his shoulder turned, he goes backwards without taking his eyes
off her... she runs off in the opposite direction.)
 (ROS and GUIL have frozen. GUIL unfreezes first. He jumps at ROS.)
 GUIL: Come on!
 (But a flourish - enter CLAUDIUS and GERTRUDE, attended.)
 CLAUDIUS: Welcome, dear Rosencrantz... (he raises a hand at GUIL while
ROS bows - GUIL bows late and hurriedly.)... and Guildenstern.
 (He raises a hand at ROS while GUIL bows to him - ROS is still straightening up from his previous bow and
half way up he bows down again. With his head down, he twists to look at GUIL, who is on the way up.)
Moreover that we did much long to see you,
 The need we have to use you did provoke
 Our hasty sanding.
 (ROS and GUIL still adjusting their clothing for CLAUDIUS's presence.)
 Something have you heard
 Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
 Sith nor th'exterior nor inward man
 Resembles that it was. What it should be,
 More than his father's death, that thus hath put him,
 So much from th'understanding of himself,
 I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
 That, being of so young days brought up with him
 And sith so neighbored to his youth and haviour
 That you ... safe your rest here on our court
 Some little time, so by your companies
 To draw him on to pleasures and to gather
 So much as from occasion you may glean,
 Whether ought to us unknown afflicts him thus,
 That opened lies within our remedy.
 GERTRUDE: Good (fractional suspense) gentlemen...
 (They both bow.)
 He hath much talked of you,
 And sure I am, two men there is not living
 To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
 To show us so much gentry and good will
 As to expand your time with us awhile
 For the supply and profit of our hope,
 Your visitation shall receive such thanks
 As fits the king's remembrance.
 ROS: Both your majesties
 Might, by the sovereign power you have on us,
 Put your dread pleasure more into command
 Than to entreaty.
 GUIL: But we both obey,
 And here give up ourselves in the full bent
 To lay our service freely at your feet,
 To be commanded.
 CLAUDIUS: Thanks, Rosencrantz (turning to ROS who is caught unprepared, while GUIL bows) and gentle
Guildenstern (turning to GUIL who is bent double).
 GERTRUDE (correcting): Thanks, Guildenstern (turning to ROS, who bows as GUIL checks upward movement
to bow too - both bent double, squinting at each other)... and gentle Rosencrantz. (Turning to GUIL, both
straightening up - GUIL checks again and bows again.)
 And I beseech you instantly to visit
 My too much changed son. Go, some of you,
 And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
 (To ATTENDANTS exit backwards, indicating that ROS and GUIL should
follow.)
 GUIL: Heaven make our presence and our practices
 Pleasant and helpful to him.
 GERTRUDE: Ay, amen!
 (ROS and GUIL move towards and downstage wing. Before they get there,
POLONIUS enters. They stop and bow to him. He nods and hurries upstage to
CLAUDIUS. They turn to look at him but lose interest and come down to
footlights. POLINIUS meanwhile calling to CLAUDIUS.)
 POLONIUS: The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, are joyfully
returned.
 CLAUDIUS: Thou still hast been the father of good news.
 POLONIUS: Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
 I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
 Both to my God and to my gracious King;
 And I do think or else this brain of mine
 Hunts not the trail of policy for sure
 As it hath used to do, that I have found
 The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy...
 (Exeunt - leaving ROS and GUIL)
 ROS: I want to go home.
 GUIL: Don't let them confuse you.
 ROS: I'm out of my step here -
 GUIL: We'll soon be home and high - dry and home - I'll -
 ROS: It's all over my depth -
 GUIL: I'll hie you home and -
 ROS: - out of my head -
 GUIL: - dry you high and -
 ROS (cracking, high): - over my step over my head body! - I tell you it's all stopping to a death, it's boding to a
depth, stepping to a head, it's all heading to a dead stop –
 GUIL (the nursemaid): There!... and we'll soon be home and dry... and high and dry... (Rapidly.) Has it ever
happened to you that all of a sudden and for no reason at all you haven't the faintest idea how to spell the word
- "wife" - or "house" - because when you write it down you just can't remember ever having seen those letters in
that order before...?
 ROS: I remember...
 GUIL: Yes?
 ROS: I remember there were no questions.
 GUIL: There were always questions. To exchange one set for another is no great matter.
 ROS: Answers, yes. There were answers to everything.
 GUIL: You've forgotten.
 ROS (flaring): I haven't forgotten - how I used to remember my own name - and yours, oh ): I haven't forgotten -
how I used to remember my own name - and yours, oh yes! There were answers everywhere you looked. There
was no question about it - people knew who I was and if they didn't they asked and I told them.
 GUIL: You did, the trouble is each of them is... plausible, without being instinctive. All your life you live so
close to truth, it becomes a permanent blur in the corner of your eye, and when something nudges it into
outline it is like being ambushed by a grotesque. A man standing in his saddle in the half-lit half-alive dawn
banged on the shutters and called two names. He was just a hat and the cloak levitating in the grey plume of his
own breath, but when he called we came. That much is certain - we came. ROS: Well I can tell you I'm sick to
death of it. I don't care one way or another, so why don't you make up your mind.
 GUIL: We can't afford anything quite so arbitrary. Nor did we come all this way for a christening. All that -
preceded us. But we are comparatively fortunate; we might have been left to sift the whole field of human
nomenclature, like two blind men looting a bazaar for their own portraits... At least we are presented with
alternatives.
 ROS: Well as from now -
 GUIL: - But not choice.
 ROS: You made me look ridiculous in there.
 GUIL: I looked as ridiculous as you did.
 ROS (an anguished cry): Consistency is all I ask!
 GUIL (low, wry rhetoric): Give us this day our daily mask.
 ROS (a dying fall): I want to go home. (Moves.) Which way did we come in? I've lost my sense of direction.
 GUIL: The only beginning is birth and the only end is death - if you can't count on that, what can you count on?
 (They connect again.)
 ROS: We don't owe anything to anyone.
 GUIL: We've been caught up. Your smallest action sets off another somewhere else, and is set off by it. Keep
an eye open, an ear cocked. Tread warily, follow instructions. We'll be all right.
 ROS: For how long?
 GUIL: Till events have played themselves out. There's a logic at work - it's all done for you, don't worry. Enjoy it.
Relax. To be taken in hand and led, like being a child again, even without the innocence, a child - It's
like being given a prize, an extra slice of childhood when you least expect it, as a prize for being good, or a
compensation for never having had one... Do I contradict myself?
 ROS: I don't remember. What have we got to go on?
 GUIL: We have been briefed. Hamlet's transformation. What do you recollect?
 ROS: Well, he's changed, hasn't he? The exterior and inward man fails to resemble -
 GUIL: Draw him on to pleasures - glean what afflicts him.
 ROS: Something more than his father's death -
 GUIL: He's always talking about us - there aren't two people living whom he dotes on more than us.
 ROS: We cheer him up - find out what's the matter -
 GUIL: Exactly, it's the matter of asking the right questions and giving away as little as we can. It's a game.
 ROS: And then we can go?
 GUIL: And receive such thanks as fits a king's remembrance.
 ROS: I like the sound of that. What do you think he means by remembrance?
 GUIL: He doesn't forget his friends.
 ROS: Wouldn't you care to estimate?
 GUIL: Difficult to say, really - come kings tend to be amnesiac, others I suppose - the opposite, whatever that is...
 ROS: Yes - but -
 GUIL: Elephantine...?
 ROS: Hot how long - how much?
 GUIL: Retentive - he's a very retentive king, a royal retainer...
 ROS: What are you playing at?
 GUIL: Words, words. They're all we have to go on.
 (Pause.)
 ROS: Shouldn't we be doing something - constructive?
 GUIL: What did you have in mind?... A short, blunt human pyramid...?
 ROS: We could go.
 GUIL: Where?
 ROS: After him.
 GUIL: Why? They've got us placed now - if we start moving around, we'll all be chasing each other all night.
 (Hiatus.)
 ROS (at footlights): How very intriguing! (Turns.) I feel like a spectator - an appalling business. The only
thing that makes it bearable is the irrational belief that somebody interesting will come on in a minute...
 GUIL: See anyone?
 ROS: No. You?
 GUIL: No. (At footlights.) What a fine persecution - to be kept intrigued without ever quite being
enlightened... (Pause.) We've had no practice.
 ROS: We could play at questions.
 GUIL: What good would that do?
 ROS: Practice!
 GUIL: Statement! One-love.
 ROS: Cheating!
 GUIL: How?
 ROS: I hadn't started yet.
 GUIL: Statement. Two-love.
 ROS: Are you counting that?
 GUIL: What?
 ROS: Are you counting that?
 GUIL: Foul! No repetitions. Three-love. First game to...
 ROS: I'm not going to play if you're going to be like that.
 GUIL: Whose serve?
 ROS: Hah?
 GUIL: Foul! No grunts. Love-one.
 ROS: Whose go?
 GUIL: Why?
 ROS: Why not?
 GUIL: What for?
 ROS: Foul! No synonyms! One-all.
 GUIL: What in God's name is going all?
 ROS: Foul! No rhetoric. Two-one.
 GUIL: What does it all add up to?
 ROS: Can't you guess?
 GUIL: Were you addressing me?
 ROS: Is there anyone else?
 GUIL: Who?
 ROS: How would I know?
 GUIL: Why do you ask?
 ROS: Are you serious?
 GUIL: Was that rhetoric?
 ROS: No.
 GUIL: Statement! Two-all. Game point.
 ROS: What's the matter with you today?
 GUIL: When?
 ROS: What?
 GUIL: Are you deaf?
 ROS: Am I dead?
 GUIL: Yes or no?
 ROS: Is there a choice?
 GUIL: Is there a God?
 ROS: Foul! No non sequiturs, three-two, one game all.
 GUIL (seriously): What's your name?
 ROS: What's yours?
 GUIL: I asked you first.
 ROS: Statement. One-love.
 GUIL: What's your name when you're at home?
 ROS: What's yours?
 GUIL: When I'm at home?
 ROS: Is it different at home?
 GUIL: What home?
 ROS: Haven't you got one?
 GUIL: Why do you ask?
 ROS: What are you driving at?
 GUIL (with emphasis): What's your name?!
 ROS: Repetition. Two-love. Match point to me.
 GUIL (seizing him violently): WHO DO YOU THINK YOU ARE?
 ROS: Rhetoric! Game and match! (Pause.) Where's it going to end?
 GUIL: That's the question.
 ROS: It's all questions.
 GUIL: Do you think it matters?
 ROS: Doesn't it matter to you?
 GUIL: Why should it matter?
 ROS: What does it matter why?
 GUIL (teasing gently): Doesn't it matter why it matters?
 ROS (rounding on him): What's the matter with you?
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: It doesn't matter.
 ROS (voice in the wilderness): ... What's the game?
 GUIL: What are the rules?
 (Enter HAMLET behind, crossing the stage, reading a book - as he is about to disappear GUIL notices him.)
 GUIL (sharply): Rosencrantz!
 ROS (jumps): What?
 (HAMLET goes. Triumph dawns on them, they smile.)
 GUIL: There! How was that?
 ROS: Clever!
 GUIL: Natural?
 ROS: Instinctive.
 GUIL: Got it in your head?
 ROS: I take my hat off you.
 GUIL: Shake hands.
 (They do.)
 ROS: Now I'll try you - Guil - !
 GUIL: - Not yet - catch me unawares.
 ROS: Right. (They separate. Pause. Aside to GUIL.) Ready?
 GUIL (explodes): Don't be stupid.
 ROS: Sorry.
 (Pause.)
 GUIL (snaps): Guildenstern!
 ROS (jumps): What? (He is immediately crestfallen, GUIL is disgusted.)
 GUIL: Consistency is all I ask!
 ROS (guilty): Give us this day our daily week...
 (Beat.)
 ROS: Who was that?
 GUIL: Didn't you know him?
 ROS: He didn't know me.
 GUIL: He didn't see you.
 ROS: I didn't see him.
 GUIL: We shall see. I hardly knew him, he's changed.
 ROS: You could see that?
 GUIL: Transformed.
 ROS: How do you know?
 GUIL: Inside and out.
 ROS: I see.
 GUIL: He's not himself.
 ROS: He's changed.
 GUIL: I could see that. (Beat.) Glean what afflicts him.
 ROS: Me?
 GUIL: Him.
 ROS: How?
 GUIL: Question and answer. Old ways are the best ways.
 ROS: He's afflicted.
 GUIL: You question, I'll answer.
 ROS: He's not himself, you know.
 GUIL: I'm him, you see.
 (Beat.)
 ROS: Who am I then?
 GUIL: You're yourself.
 ROS: And he's you?
 GUIL: Not a bit of it.
 ROS: Are you afflicted?
 GUIL: That's the idea. Are you ready?
 ROS: Let's go back a bit.
 GUIL: I'm afflicted.
 ROS: I see.
 GUIL: Glean what afflicts me.
 ROS: Right.
 GUIL: Question and answer.
 ROS: How should I begin?
 GUIL: Address me.
 ROS: My dear Guildenstern!
 GUIL (quietly): You've forgotten - haven't you?
 ROS: My dear Rosencrantz!
 GUIL (great control): I don't think you quite understand. What we are attempting is a hypothesis in which I
answer for him, while you ask me questions.
 ROS: Ah! Ready?
 GUIL: You know what to do?
 ROS: What?
 GUIL: Are you stupid?
 ROS: Pardon?
 GUIL: Are you deaf?
 ROS: Did you speak?
 GUIL (admonishing): Not now -
 ROS: Statement.
 GUIL (shouts): Not now! (Pause.) If I had my doubts, or rather hopes, they are dispelled. What could we
possibly have in common except our situation? (They separate and sit.) Perhaps he'll come back this way.
 ROS: Should we go?
 GUIL: Why?
 (Pause.)
 ROS (starts up. Snaps fingers.): Oh! You mean - you pretend to be him, and I ask you questions!
 GUIL (dry): Very good.
 ROS: You had me confused.
 GUIL: I could see I had.
 ROS: How should I begin?
 GUIL: Address me.
 (They stand and face each other, posing.)
 ROS: My honoured Lord!
 GUIL: My dear Rosencrantz!
 (Pause.)
 ROS: Am I pretending to be you, then?
 GUIL: Certainly not. If you like. Shall we continue?
 ROS: Question and answer.
 GUIL: Right.
 ROS: Right. My honoured Lord!
 GUIL: My dear fellow!
 ROS: How are you?
 GUIL: Afflicted!
 ROS: Really? In what way?
 GUIL: Transformed.
 ROS: Inside or out?
 GUIL: Both.
 ROS: I see. (Pause.) No much new there.
 GUIL: Go into details. Delve. Probe the background, establish the situation.
 ROS: So - so your uncle is the king of Denmark?
 GUIL: And my father before him.
 ROS: But surely -
 GUIL: You might well ask.
 ROS: Let me get it straight. Your father was king. You were his only son. Your father dies. You are of age. Your
uncle becomes king.
 GUIL: Yes.
 ROS: Unorthodox.
 GUIL: Undid me.
 ROS: Undeniable. Where were you?
 GUIL: In Germany.
 ROS: Usurpation, then.
 GUIL: He slipped in.
 ROS: Which reminds me.
 GUIL: Well, it would.
 ROS: I don't want to be personal.
 GUIL: It's common knowledge.
 ROS: Your mother's marriage.
 GUIL: He slipped in.
 (Beat.)
 ROS (lugubriously): His body was still warm.
 GUIL: So was hers.
 ROS: Extraordinary.
 GUIL: Indecent.
 ROS: Hasty.
 GUIL: Suspicious.
 ROS: It makes you think.
 GUIL: Don't think I haven't though of it.
 ROS: And with her husband's brother.
 GUIL: They were close.
 ROS: She went to him -
 GUIL: - Too close -
 ROS: - for comfort.
 GUIL: It looks bad.
 ROS: It adds up
 GUIL: Incest and adultery.
 ROS: Would you go so far?
 GUIL: Never.
 ROS: To sum up: your father, whom you love, dies, you are his heir, you come back to find that hardly was the
corpse cold before his young brother popped on to his throne and into his sheets, thereby offending both legal
and natural practice. Now, why exactly you behaving in this extraordinary manner?
 GUIL: I can't imagine. (Pause.) But all that is well known, common property. Yet he sent for us. And we did
come.
 ROS (alert, ear cocked): I say! I heard music -
 GUIL: We're here.
 ROS: - Like a band - I thought I heard a band.
 GUIL: Rosencrantz...
 ROS (absently, still listening): What?
 (Pause, short.)
 GUIL (gently wry): Guildenstern...
 ROS (irritated by the repetition): What?
 GUIL: Don't you discriminate at all?
 ROS (turning dumbly): What?
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: Go and see if he's there.
 ROS: Who?
 GUIL: There.
 (ROS goes to an upstage wing, looks, returns, formally making his report.)
 ROS: Yes.
 GUIL: What is he doing?
 (ROS repeats movement.)
 ROS: Talking.
 GUIL: To himself?
 (ROS starts to move. GUIL cuts him impatiently.)
 Is he alone?
 ROS: No.
 GUIL: Then he's not talking to himself, is he?
 ROS: Not by himself... Coming this way, I think. (Shiftily.) Should we go?
 GUIL: Why? We're marked now.
 (HAMLET enters, backwards, talking, followed by POLONIUS, upstage. ROS and GUIL occupy the two
downstage corners looking upstage.)
 HAMLET: ... for you yourself, sir, should be as old as I am if like a crab you could go backwards.
 POLONIUS (aside): Though this be madness, yet there is method in it.
Will you walk out of air, my Lord?
 HAMLET: Into my grave.
 POLONIUS: Indeed, that's out of air.
 (HAMLET crosses to upstage exit, POLONIUS asiding unintelligibly until -)
 My lord, I will take my leave of you.
 HAMLET: You cannot take from me anything that I will more willingly part withal - except my life, except my life,
except my life...
 POLONIUS (crossing downstage): Fare you well, my lord. (To ROS.) You go
to seek Lord HAMLET? There he is.
 ROS (to POLONIUS) God save you, sir.
 (POLONIUS goes.)
 GUIL (calls upstage to HAMLET): My honoured Lord!
 ROS: My most dear Lord!
 (HAMLET centred upstage, turns to them.)
 HAMLET: My excellent good friends! How dost thou Guildenstern? (Coming downstage with am arm raised to
ROS, GUIL meanwhile bowing to no greeting.
HAMLET corrects himself. Still to ROS.) Ah Rosencrantz!
 (They laugh good naturedly at the mistake. They all meet midstage, turn upside to walk, HAMLET in the middle,
arm over each shoulder.)
 HAMLET: Good lads, how do you both?
 (A fade out. That is to say, the conversation - see Shakespeare, Act
II, Scene ii - runs down quickly; it is still animated and interspersed with
laughter, but it is overtaken by rising music and fading light.)

 Act Two.
 HAMLET, ROS and GUIL talking, the continuation of the previous scene. Their conversation, on the move, is
indecipherable at first. The first illegible line is HAMLET's, coming at the end of a short speech ? see
Shakespeare Act II, scene ii.
 HAMLET: S'blood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could take it out.
 (A flourish from the TRAGEDIANS' band.)
 GUIL: There are the players.
 HAMLET: Gentlemen, you are welcome in Elsinore. Your hands, come then. (He takes their hands.) The
appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the
players (which I tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
welcome. (About to leave.) But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.
 GUIL: In what, my dear lord?
 HAMLET: I am but mad north north-west; when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.
 (POLUNIUS enters, as GUIL turns away.)
 POLONIUS: Well be you gentlemen.
 HAMLET (to ROS): Mark you, Guildenstern (uncertainly to GUIL) and you too; at each ear a hearer. That great
baby you see there is not yet out of swaddling clouts... (He takes ROS upstage with him, talking together.)
 POLONIUS: My Lord! I have news to tell you.
 HAMLET (releasing ROS and mimicking): My lord, I have news to tell you... When Rocius was an actor in
Rome...
 (ROS comes down to re-join GUIL.)
 POLONIUS (as he follows HAMLET out): The actors are come hither my
lord.
 HAMLET: Buzz, buzz.
 (Exeunt HAMLET and POLONIUS.)
 (ROS and GUIL ponder. Each reluctant to speak first.)
 GUIL: Hm?
 ROS: Yes?
 GUIL: What?
 ROS: I thought you...
 GUIL: No.
 ROS: Ah.
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: I think we can say we made some headway.
 ROS: You think so?
 GUIL: I think we can say that.
 ROS: I think we can say he made us look ridiculous.
 GUIL: We played it close to the chest of course.
 ROS (derisively): "Question and answer. Old ways are the best ways"! He was scoring off us all down the line.
 GUIL: He caught us on the wrong foot once or twice, perhaps, but I thought we gained some ground.
 ROS (simply): He murdered us.
 GUIL: He might have had the edge.
 ROS (roused): Twenty-seven - three, and you think he might have had the edge?! He murdered us.
 GUIL: What about our evasions?
 ROS: Oh, our evasions were lovely. "Were you sent for?" he says. "My lord, we were sent for..." I didn't where
to put myself.
 GUIL: He had six rhetoricals -
 ROS: It was question and answer, all right. Twenty-seven questions he got out in ten minutes, and answered
three. I was waiting for you to delve. "When is he going to start delving?" I asked myself.
 GUIL: - And two repetitions.
 ROS: Hardly a leading question between us.
 GUIL: We got his symptoms, didn't we?
 ROS: Half of what he said meant something else, and the other half
didn't mean anything at all.
 GUIL: Thwarted ambition - a sense of grievance, that's my diagnosis.
 ROS: Six rhetorical and two repetitions, leaving nineteen of which we answered fifteen. And what did we get
in return? He's depressed!... Denmark's a prison and he'd rather live in a nutshell; some shadow-play
about the nature of ambition, which never got down to cases, and finally one direct question which might have led
somewhere, and led in fact to his illuminating claim to tell a hawk from a handsaw.
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: When the wind is southerly.
 ROS: And when the weather is clear.
 GUIL: And when it isn't he can't.
 ROS: He's at the mercy of the elements. (Licks his finger and holds it up - facing audience.) Is that southerly?
 (They stare at the audience.)
 GUIL: It doesn't look southerly. What made you think so?
 ROS: I didn't say I think so. It could be northerly for all I know.
 GUIL: I wouldn't have thought so.
 ROS: Well, if you're going to be dogmatic.
 GUIL: Wait a minute - we came from roughly south according to a rough map.
 ROS: I see. Well, which way did we come in? (GUIL looks around vaguely.) Roughly.
 GUIL (clears his throat): In the morning the sun would be easterly. I think we can assume that.
 ROS: That it's morning?
 GUIL: If it is, and the sun is over there (his right as he faces the audience) for instance, that (front) would be
northerly. On the other hand, if it's not morning and the sun is over there (his left)... that... (lamely) would still be
northerly. (Picking up.) To put it another way, if we came from down there (front) and it is morning, the sun would
be up there (his left), and if it is actually over there (his right) and it's still morning, we must have come from up there
(behind him), and if that is southerly (his left) and the sun is really over there (front), then it's afternoon.
However, if none of these is the case –
 ROS: Why don't you go and have a look?
 GUIL: Pragmatism?! - is that all you have to offer? You seem to have no conception of where we stand! You
won't find the answer written down for you in the bowl of a compass - I can tell you that. (Pause.) Besides, you can
never tell this far north - it's probably dark out there.
 ROS: I merely suggest that the position of the sun, if it is out, would give you a rough idea of the time;
alternatively, the clock, if it is going, would give you a rough idea of the position of the sun. I forget which
you're trying to establish.
 GUIL: I'm trying to establish the direction of the wind.
 ROS: There isn't any wind. Draught, yes.
 GUIL: In that case, the origin. Trace it to the source and it might give us a rough idea of the way we came in -
which might give us a rough idea of south, for further reference.
 ROS: It's coming up through the floor. (He studies the floor.) That can't be south, can it?
 GUIL: That's not direction. Lick your toe and wave it around a bit.
 (ROS considers the distance to his foot.)
 ROS: No, I think you'd have to lick it for me.
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: I'm prepared to let the whole matter drop.
 ROS: Or I could lick yours, of course.
 GUIL: No thank you.
 ROS: I'll even wave it around for you.
 GUIL (down ROS's throat): What in God's name is the matter with you?
 ROS: Just being friendly.
 GUIL (retiring): Somebody might come in. It's what we're counting on, after all. Ultimately.
 (Good pause.)
 ROS: Perhaps they've all trampled each other to death in the rush. Give them a shout. Something provocative.
Intrigue them.
 GUIL: Wheels have been set in motion, and they have their own pace, to which we are... condemned. Each
move is dictated by the previous one - that is the meaning of order. If we start being arbitrary it'll just be a
shambles: at least, let us hope so. Because if we happened, just happened to discover, or even suspect, that our
spontaneity was part of their order, we'd know that we were lost. (He sits.) A Chinaman of the T'ang Dynasty -
and, by which definition, a philosopher - dreamed he was a butterfly, and from that moment he was never quite
sure that he was not a butterfly dreaming it was a Chinese philosopher. Envy him, in his two-fold security.
 (A good pause. ROS leaps up and bellows at the audience.)
 ROS: Fire!
 (GUIL jumps up.)
 GUIL: Where?
 ROS: It's all right - I'm demonstrating the misuse of free speech. To prove that it exists. (He regards the
audience, that is the direction, with contempt - and other directions, then front again.) Not a move. They should
burn to death in their shoes.
 (ROS takes out one of his coins. Spins it. Catches it. Looks at it.
Replaces it.)
 GUIL: What was it?
 ROS: What?
 GUIL: Heads or tails?
 ROS: Oh. I didn't look.
 GUIL: Yes you did.
 ROS: Oh, did I? (He takes a coin, studies it.) Quite right - it rings a bell.
 GUIL: What's the last thing you remember?
 ROS: I don't wish to be reminded of it.
 GUIL: We cross our bridges when we come to them and burn them behind us, with nothing to show our
progress except a memory of the smell of smoke, and a presumption that once our eyes watered.
 (ROS approaches him brightly, holding a coin between finger and thumb.
He covers it with the other hand, draws his fist apart and holds them for
GUIL. GUIL considers them. Indicates the left hand, ROS opens it to show it
empty.)
 ROS: No.
 (Repeat process. GUIL indicates left hand again. ROS shows it empty.)
 Double bluff!
 (Repeat process - GUIL taps one hand, then the other hand, quickly. ROS inadvertently shows that both are
empty. ROS laughs as GUIL turns upstage. ROS stops laughing, looks around his left, pats his clothes, puzzled.)
 (POLONIUS breaks that up by entering upstage followed by the TRAGEDIANS
and HAMLET.)
 POLONIUS (entering): Come, sirs.
 HAMLET: Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play tomorrow.
 (Aside to the PLAYER, who is the last of the TRAGEDIANS.)
 Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?
 PLAYER: Ay, my lord.
 HAMLET: We'll ha't tomorrow night. You could for a need study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I
would set down and insert in't, could you not?
 PLAYER: Ay, my lord.
 HAMLET: Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not.
 (The PLAYER crossing downstage, notes ROS and GUIL. Stops. HAMLET crossing downstage addresses
them without a pause.)
 HAMLET: My good friends, I'll leave you till tonight. You are welcome to Elsinore.
 ROS: Good, my lord.
 (HAMLET goes.)
 GUIL: So you've caught up.
 PLAYER (coldly): Not yet, sir.
 GUIL: Now mind your tongue, or we'll have it out and throw the rest of you away, like a nightingale at a Roman
feast.
 PLAYER: Took the very words out of my mouth.
 GUIL: You'd be lost for words.
 ROS: You'd be tongue-tied.
 GUIL: Like a mute in a monologue.
 ROS: Like a nightingale at a Roman feast.
 GUIL: Your diction will go to pieces.
 ROS: Your lines will be cut.
 GUIL: To dumbshows.
 ROS: And dramatic pauses.
 GUIL: You'll never find your tongue.
 ROS: Lick your lips.
 GUIL: Taste your tears.
 ROS: Your breakfast.
 GUIL: You won't know the difference.
 ROS: There won't be any.
 GUIL: We'll take the very words out of your mouth.
 ROS: So you've caught up.
 GUIL: So you've caught up.
 PLAYER (tops): Not yet! (Bitterly.) You left us.
 GUIL: Ah! I'd forgotten - you performed a dramatic spectacle by the wayside - a thing much thought of in the
New Testament. How did yours compare as an impromptu?
 PLAYER: Badly - neither witnessed nor reported.
 GUIL: Yes, I'm sorry we had to miss it. I hope you didn't leave anything out - I'd be furious to think I didn't
miss all of it.
 (The PLAYER, progressively aggrieved, now burst out.)
 PLAYER: We can't look each other in the face! (Pause, more in control.) You don't understand the humiliation of
it - to be tricked out of a single assumption, which makes our existence viable - that somebody is watching...
The plot was two corpses gone before we caught sight of ourselves, stripped naked in the middle of nowhere and
pouring ourselves down a bottomless well.
 ROS: Is that thirty eight?
 PLAYER (lost): There we are - demented children mincing about in clothes that no one ever wore, speaking
as no man ever spoke, swearing love in wigs and rhymed couplets, killing each other with wooden swords, hollow
protestations of faith hurled after empty promises of vengeance - and every gesture, every pose, vanishing into the
thin unpopulated air. We ransomed our dignity to the clouds, and the uncomprehending birds listened. (He
rounds on them.) Don't you see?! We're actors - we're the opposite of people! (They recoil nonplussed, his voice
calms.) Think, in your head, now, think of the most... private... secret... intimate... thing you have ever
done secure in the knowledge of its privacy... (He gives them - and the audience - a good pause. ROS takes a
shifty look.) Are you thinking of it? (He strikes with his voice and his head.) Well, I saw you do it!
 (ROS leaps up, dissembling madly.)
 ROS: You never! It's a lie! (He catches himself with a giggle in a vacuum and sits down again.)
 PLAYER: We're actors... We pledged our identities, secure in the conventions of our trade; that someone
would be watching. And than, gradually, no one was. We were caught, high and dry. It was not until the
murder's long soliloquy that we were able to look around; frozen we were in the profil, our eyes searched you out,
first confidently, then hesitantly, then desperately as each patch of turf, each log, each exposed corned in
every direction proved uninhabited, and all the while the murderous King addressed the horizon with his dreary
interminable guilt... Our heads began to move, wary as lizards, the corpse of unsullied Rosalinda peeped through
his fingers, and the King faltered. Even then, habit and a stubborn trust that our audience spied upon us from
behind the nearest bush, forced our bodies to blunder on long after they had emptied of meaning, until like
runaway carts they dragged to a halt. No one came forward. No one shouted at us. The silence was unbreakable, it
imposed itself upon us; it was obscene.
We took off our crowns and swords and cloth of gold and moved silent on the road to Elsinore.
 (Silence. Then GUIL claps solo with slow measured irony.)
 GUIL: Brilliantly re-created - if these eyes could weep!... Rather strong on metaphor, mind you. No criticism -
only a matter of taste. And so here you are - with a vengeance. That's a figure of speech... isn't it? Well
let's say we've made up for it, for you may have no doubt whom to thank for your performance at the court.
 ROS: We are counting on you to take him out of himself. You are the pleasures which we draw him on to -
(he escapes a fractional giggle but recovers immediately) and by that I don't mean your usual filth; you can't .
treat royalty like people with normal perverted desires. They know nothing of that and you know nothing of them, to
your mutual survival. So give him a good clean show suitable for all the family, or you can rest assured you'll
be playing the tavern tonight.
 GUIL: Or the night, after.
 ROS: Or not.
 PLAYER: We already have an entry here. And always have had.
 GUIL: You've played for him before?
 PLAYER: Yes, sir.
 ROS: And what's his bent?
 PLAYER: Classical.
 ROS: Saucy!
 GUIL: What will you play?
 PLAYER: "The Murder of Gonzago".
 GUIL: Full of fine cadence and corpses.
 PLAYER: Pirated from the Italian....
 ROS: What is it about?
 PLAYER: It's about a King and Queen....
 GUIL: Escapism! What else?
 PLAYER: Blood - -
 GUIL: - Love and rhetoric.
 PLAYER: Yes. (Going.)
 GUIL: Where are you going?
 PLAYER: I can come and go as I please.
 GUIL: You're evidently a man who knows his way around.
 PLAYER: I've been here before.
 GUIL: We're still finding our feet.
 PLAYER: I should concentrate on not losing your heads.
 GUIL: Do you speak from knowledge?
 PLAYER: Precedent.
 GUIL: You've been here before.
 PLAYER: And I know which way the wind is blowing.
 GUIL: Operating on two levels, are we?! How clever! I expect it comes
naturally to you, being in the business so to speak.
 (The PLAYER's grave face does not change. He makes to move off again.
GUIL for the second time cuts him off.)
 The truth is, we value your company, for want of any other. We have been left so much to our own devices -
after a while one welcomes the uncertainty of being left to other people's.
 PLAYER: Uncertainty is the normal state. You're nobody special.
 (He makes to leave again. GUIL loses his cool.)
 GUIL: But for God's sake what are we supposed to do?
 PLAYER: Relax. Respond. That's what people do. You can't go through life questioning your situation at every
turn.
 GUIL: But we don't know what's going on, or what to do with ourselves. We don't know how to act.
 PLAYER: Act natural. You know why you're here at least.
 GUIL: We only know what we're told, and that's little enough. And for all we know it isn't even true.
 PLAYER: For all anyone knows, nothing is. Everything has to be taken on trust; truth is only that which is taken
to be true. It's the currency of living. There may be nothing behind it, but it doesn't make any difference
so long as it is honoured. One acts on assumptions. What do you assume?
 ROS: Hamlet is not himself, outside or in. We have to glean what
afflicts him.
 GUIL: He doesn't give much away.
 PLAYER: Who does, nowadays?
 GUIL: He's - melancholy.
 PLAYER: Melancholy?
 ROS: Mad.
 PLAYER: How is he mad?
 ROS: Ah. (To GUIL.) How is he mad?
 GUIL: More morose than mad, perhaps.
 PLAYER: Melancholy.
 GUIL: Moody.
 ROS: He has moods.
 PLAYER: Of moroseness?
 GUIL: Madness. And yet.
 ROS: Quite.
 GUIL: For instance.
 ROS: He talks to himself, which might be madness.
 GUIL: If he didn't talk sense, which he does.
 ROS: Which suggests the opposite.
 PLAYER: Of what?
 (Small pause.)
 GUIL: I think I have it. A man talking sense to himself is no madder
than a man talking nonsense not to himself.
 ROS: Or just as mad.
 GUIL: Or just as mad.
 ROS: And he does both.
 GUIL: So there you are.
 ROS: Stark raving sane.
 (Pause.)
 PLAYER: Why?
 GUIL: Ah. (To ROS.) Why?
 ROS: Exactly.
 GUIL: Exactly what? .
 ROS: Exactly why.
 GUIL: Exactly why what?
 ROS: What?
 GUIL: Why?
 ROS: Why what, exactly?
 GUIL: Why is he mad?!
 ROS: I don't know!
 (Beat.)
 PLAYER: The old man thinks he's in love with his daughter.
 ROS (appalled): Good God! We're out of our depth here.
 PLAYER: No, no, no - he hasn't got a daughter - the old man thinks he's in love with his daughter.
 ROS: The old man is?
 PLAYER: Hamlet, in love with the old man's daughter, the old man thinks.
 ROS: Ha! It's beginning to make sense! Unrequited passion!
 (The PLAYER moves.)
 GUIL (Fascist): Nobody leaves this room! (Pause, lamely.) Without a very good reason.
 PLAYER: Why not?
 GUIL: All this strolling about is getting too arbitrary by half - I'm rapidly losing my grip. From now on reason will
prevail.
 PLAYER: I have lines to learn.
 GUIL: Pass!
 (The PLAYER passes into one of the wings. ROS cups his hands and shouts into the opposite one.)
 ROS: Next!
 (But no one comes.)
 GUIL: What did you expect?
 ROS: Something ... someone ... nothing. (They sit facing front.)
 Are you hungry?
 GUIL: No, are you?
 ROS (thinks): No. You remember that coin?
 GUIL: No.
 ROS: I think I lost it.
 GUIL: What coin?
 ROS: I don't remember exactly.
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: Oh, that coin ... clever.
 ROS: I can't remember how I did it.
 GUIL: It probably comes natural to you.
 ROS: Yes, I've got a show-stopper there.
 GUIL: Do it again.
 (Slight pause.)
 ROS: We can't afford it.
 GUIL: Yes, one must think of the future.
 ROS: It's the normal thing.
 GUIL: To have one. One is, after all, having it all the time... now...
and now... and now....
 ROS: It could go on for ever. Well, not for ever, I suppose. (Pause.) Do you ever think of yourself as actually
dead, lying in a box with a lid on it?
 GUIL: No.
 ROS: Nor do I, really.... It's silly to be depressed by it. I mean one thinks of it like being alive in a box, one
keeps forgetting to take into account the fact that one is dead ... which should make a difference ...
shouldn't it? I mean, you'd never know you were in a box, would you? It would be just like being asleep in a box.
Not that I'd like to sleep in a box, mind you, not without any air - you'd wake up dead, for a start and
then where would you be? Apart from inside a box. That's the bit I don't like, frankly. That's why I don't think of it....
 (GUIL stirs restlessly, pulling his cloak round him.)
 Because you'd be helpless, wouldn't you? Stuffed in a box like that, I mean you'd be in there for ever. Even
taking into account the fact that you're dead, really ... ask yourself, if I asked you straight off - I'm
going to stuff you in this box now, would you rather be alive or dead? Naturally, you'd prefer to be alive. Life in a
box is better than no life at all. I expect. You'd have a chance at least. You could lie there thinking -
well, at least I'm not dead! In a minute someone's going to bang on the lid and tell me to come out. (Banging on the
floor with his fists.) "Hey you, whatsyername! Come out of there!"
 GUIL (jumps up savagely): You don't have to flog it to death!
 (Pause.)
 ROS: I wouldn't think about it, if I were you. You'd only get depressed. (Pause.) Eternity is a terrible
thought. I mean, where's it going to end? (Pause, then brightly.) Two early Christians chanced to meet in
Heaven. "Saul of Tarsus yet!" cried one. "What are you doing here?!" ... "Tarsus-Schmarsus", replied the other,
"I'm Paul already."
 (ROS stands up restlessly and flaps his arms.)
 They don't care. We count for nothing. We could remain silent till we're green in the face, they wouldn't come.
 GUIL: Blue, red.
 ROS: A Christian, a Moslem and a Jew chanced to meet in a closed carriage.... "Silverstein!" cried the Jew,
"Who's your friend?" ... "His name's Abdullah", replied the Moslem, "but he's no friend of mine since he
became a convert." (He leaps up again, stamps his foot and shouts into the wings.) All right, we know you're in
there! Come out talking! (Pause.) We have no control. None at all.... (He paces.) Whatever became of the moment
when one first knew about death? There must have been one, a moment, in childhood when it first occurred to
you that you don't go on for ever. It must have been shattering - stamped into one's memory. And yet I can't
remember it. It never occurred to me at all. What does one make of that? We must be born with an intuition of
mortality. Before we know the words for it, before we know that there are words, out we come, bloodied and
squalling with the knowledge that for all the compasses in the world, there's only one direction, and time is its only
measure. (He reflects, getting more desperate and rapid.) A Hindu, a Buddhist and a lion-tamer chanced to meet,
in a circus on the Indo-Chinese border. (He breaks out.) They're taking us for granted! Well, I won't stand for it! In
future, notice will be taken. (He wheels again to face into the wings.) Keep out, then! I forbid anyone to
enter! (No one comes - Breathing heavily.) That's better....
 (Immediately, behind him a grand procession enters, principally
CLAUDIUS, GERTRUDE, POLONIUS and OPHELIA. CLAUDIUS takes ROS's elbow as he passes and is
immediately deep in conversation: the context is Shakespeare
Act III, Scene i. GUIL still faces front as CLAUDIUS, ROS, etc., pass
upstage and turn.)
 GUIL: Death followed by eternity ... the worst of both worlds. It is a
terrible thought.
 (He turns upstage in time to take over the conversation with CLAUDIUS.
GERTRUDE and ROS head downstage.)
 GERTRUDE: Did he receive you well?
 ROS: Most like a gentleman.
 GUIL (returning in time to take it up): But with much forcing of his disposition.
 ROS (a flat lie and he knows it and shows it, perhaps catching GUIL's
eye): Niggard of question, but of our demands most free in his reply.
 GERTRUDE: Did you assay him to any pastime?
 ROS: Madam, it so fell out that certain players
 We o'erraught on the way: of these we told him
 And there did seem in him a kind of joy
 To hear of it. They are here about the court,
 And, as I think, they have already order
 This night to play before him.
 POLONIUS: 'Tis most true
 And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
 To hear and see the matter.
 CLAUDIUS: With all my heart, and it doth content me
 To hear him so inclined.
 Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
 And drive his purpose into these delights.
 ROS: We shall, my lord.
 CLAUDIUS (leading out procession):
 Sweet Gertrude, leave us, too,
 For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
 That he, as t'were by accident, may here
 Affront Ophelia....
 (Exeunt CLAUDIUS and GERTRUDE.)
 ROS (peevish): Never a moment's peace! In and out, on and off, they're coming at us from all sides.
 GUIL: You're never satisfied.
 ROS: Catching us on the trot.... Why can't we go by them!
 GUIL: What's the difference?
 ROS: I'm going.
 (ROS pulls his cloak round him. GUIL ignores him. Without confidence ROS heads upstage. He looks out and
comes back quickly.)
 He's coming.
 GUIL: What's he doing?
 ROS: Nothing.
 GUIL: He must be doing something.
 ROS: Walking.
 GUIL: On his hands?
 ROS: No, on his feet.
 GUIL: Stark naked?
 ROS: Fully dressed.
 GUIL: Selling toffee apples?
 ROS: Not that I noticed.
 GUIL: You could be wrong?
 ROS: I don't think so.
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: I can't for the life of me see how we're going to get into conversation.
 (HAMLET enters upstage, and pauses, weighing up the pros and cons of making his quietus.)
 (ROS and GUIL watch him.)
 ROS: Nevertheless, I suppose one might say that this was a chance.... One might well ... accost him.... Yes, it
definitely looks like a chance to me.... Something on the lines of a direct informal approach ... man to man
... straight from the shoulder.... Now look here, what's it all about ... sort of thing. Yes. Yes, this looks like one to be
grabbed with both hands, I should say ... if I were asked.... No point in looking at a gift horse till you see the whites 
of its eyes, etcetera. (He has moved towards HAMLET but his nerve fails. He returns.) We're overawed, that's our
trouble. When it comes to the point we succumb to their personality....
 (OPHELIA enters, with prayerbook, a religious procession of one.)
 HAMLET: Nymph, in thy orisons be all my sins remembered.
 (At his voice she has stopped for him, he catches her up.)
 OPHELIA: Good my lord, how does your honour for this many a day?
 HAMLET: I humbly thank you - well, well, well.
 (They disappear talking into the wing.)
 ROS: It's like living in a public park!
 GUIL: Very impressive. Yes, I thought your direct informal approach was going to stop this thing dead in its
tracks there. If I might make a suggestion - shut up and sit down. Stop being perverse.
 ROS (near tears): I'm not going to stand for it!
 (A FEMALE FIGURE, ostensibly the QUEEN, enters. ROS marches up behind her, puts his hands over her eyes
and says with a desperate frivolity.)
 ROS: Guess who?!
 PLAYER (having appeared in a downstage corner): Alfred!
 (ROS lets go, spins around. He had been holding ALFRED, in his robe and blonde wig. PLAYER is in the
downstage corner still. ROS comes down to that exit. The PLAYER does not budge. He and ROS stand toe to toe.)
 ROS: Excuse me.
 (The PLAYER lifts his downstage foot. ROS bends to put his hand on the floor. The PLAYER lowers his foot.
ROS screams and leaps away.)
 PLAYER (gravely): I beg your pardon.
 GUIL (to ROS): What did he do?
 PLAYER: I put my foot down.
 ROS: My hand was on the floor!
 GUIL: You put your hand under his foot?
 ROS: I - -
 GUIL: What for?
 ROS: I thought - - (Grabs GUIL.)
 Don't leave me!
 (He makes a break for an exit. A TRAGEDIAN dressed as a king enters,
ROS recoils, breaks for the opposite wing. Two cloaked tragedians enter. ROS
tries again but another tragedian enters, and ROS retires to midstage. The
PLAYER claps his hands matter-of-factly.)
 PLAYER: Right! We haven't got much time.
 GUIL: What are you doing?
 PLAYER: Dress rehearsal. Now if you two wouldn't mind just moving back... there ... good.... (To
TRAGEDIANS.) Everyone ready? And for goodness sake, remember what we're doing. (To ROS and GUIL.) We
always use the same
costumes more or less, and they forget what they are supposed to be in you see.... Stop picking your nose, Alfred.
When Queens have to they do it by a cerebral process passed down in the blood.... Good. Silence! Off we go!
 PLAYER-KING: Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart - -
 (PLAYER jumps up angrily.)
 PLAYER: No, no, no! Dumbshow first, your confounded majesty! (To ROS and GUIL.) They're a bit out of
practice, but they always pick up wonderfully for the deaths - it brings out the poetry in them.
 GUIL: How nice.
 PLAYER: There's nothing more unconvincing than an, unconvincing death.
 GUIL: I'm sure.
 (PLAYER claps his hands.)
 PLAYER: Act One - moves now.
 (The mime. Soft music from a recorder. PLAYER-KING and PLAYER-QUEEN embrace. She kneels and
makes a show of protestation to him. He takes her up, declining his head upon her neck. He lies down. She,
seeing him asleep, leaves him.)
 GUIL: What is the dumbshow for?
 PLAYER: Well, it's a device, really - it makes the action that follows more or less comprehensible; you
understand, we are tied down to a language which makes up in obscurity what it lacks in style.
 (The mime (continued) - enter another. He takes off the SLEEPER's crown, kisses it. He had brought in a
small bottle of liquid. He pours the poison in the SLEEPER's ear, and leaves him. The sleeper convulses
heroically, dying.)
 ROS: Who was that?
 PLAYER: The King's brother and uncle to the Prince.
 GUIL: Not exactly fraternal.
 PLAYER: Not exactly avuncular, as time goes on.
 (The QUEEN returns, makes passionate action, finding the KING dead. The
POISONER comes in again, attended by two others (the two in cloaks). The
POISONER seems to console with her. The dead body is carried away. The
POISONER woos the QUEEN with gifts. She seems harsh awhile but in the end
accepts his love. End of mime, at which point, the wail of a woman in
torment and OPHELIA appears, wailing, closely followed by HAMLET in a
hysterical state, shouting at her, circling her, both midstage.)
 HAMLET: Go to, I'll no more on't; it hath made me mad!
 (She falls on her knees weeping.)
 I say we will have no more marriage! (His voice drops to include the
TRAGEDIANS, who have frozen.) Those that are married already (he leans close to the PLAYER-QUEEN and
POISONER, speaking with quiet edge) all but one shall live. (He smiles briefly at them without mirth, and starts
to back out, his parting shot rising again.) The rest shall keep as they are. (As he leaves, OPHELIA tottering
upstage, he speaks into her ear a quick clipped sentence.) To a nunnery, go.
 (He goes out. OPHELIA falls on her knees upstage, her sobs barely
audible. A slight silence.)
 PLAYER-KING: Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart - -
 (CLAUDIUS enters with POLONIUS and goes over to OPHELIA and lifts her
to her feet. The TRAGEDIANS jump back with heads inclined.)
 CLAUDIUS: Love? His affections do not that way tend,
 Or what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
 Was not like madness. There's something
 in his soul o'er which his melancholy sits on
 brood, and I do doubt the hatch and the
 disclose will be some danger; which for to
 prevent I have in quick determination thus set
 it down: he shall with speed to England....
 (Which carries the three of them - CLAUDIUS, POLONIUS, OPHELIA - out of sight. The PLAYER moves,
clapping his hands for attention.)
 PLAYER: Gentlemen! (They look at him.) It doesn't seem to be coming. We are not getting it at all. (To GUIL.)
What did you think?
 GUIL: What was I supposed to think?
 PLAYER (to TRAGEDIANS): You're not getting across!
 (ROS had gone halfway up to OPHELIA; he returns.)
 ROS: That didn't look like love to me.
 GUIL: Starting from scratch again....
 PLAYER (to TRAGEDIANS): It was a mess.
 ROS (to GUIL): It's going to be chaos on the night.
 GUIL: Keep back - we're spectators.
 PLAYER: Act two! Positions!
 GUIL: Wasn't that the end?
 PLAYER: Do you call that an ending? - with practically everyone on his feet? My goodness no - over your dead
body.
 GUIL: How am I supposed to take that?
 PLAYER: Lying down. (He laughs briefly and in a second has never laughed in his life.) There's a design at
work in all art - surely you know that? Events must play themselves out to aesthetic, moral and logical
conclusion.
 GUIL: And what's that, in this case?
 PLAYER: It never varies - we aim at the point where everyone who is marked for death dies.
 GUIL: Marked?
 PLAYER: Between "just desserts" and "tragic irony" we are given quite a lot of scope for our particular talent.
Generally speaking, things have gone about as far as they can possibly go when things have got about as bad as
they reasonably get. (He switches on a smile.)
 GUIL: Who decides?
 PLAYER (switching off his smile): Decides? It is written. (He turns away. GUIL grabs him and spins him back
violently.) (Unflustered.) Now if you're going to be subtle, we'll miss each other in the dark. I'm referring
to oral tradition. So to speak.
 (GUIL releases him.)
 We're tragedians, you see. We follow directions-there is no choice involved. The bad end unhappily, the good
unluckily. That is what tragedy means. (Calling.)
 Positions!
 (The TRAGEDIANS have taken up positions for the continuation of the mime: which in this case means a love
scene, sexual and passionate, between the QUEEN and the POISONER/KING.)
 PLAYER: Go!
 (The lovers begin. The PLAYER contributes a breathless commentary for ROS and GUIL.)
 Having murdered his brother and wooed the widow-the poisoner mounts the throne! Here we see him and his
queen give rein to their unbridled passion! She little knowing that the man she holds in her arms--!
 ROS: Oh, I say-here-really! You can't do that!
 PLAYER: Why not?
 ROS: Well, really-I mean, people want to be entertained-they don't come expecting sordid and gratuitous filth.
 PLAYER: You're wrong - they do! Murder, seduction and incest - what do you want -jokes?
 ROS: I want a good story, with a beginning, middle and end.
 PLAYER (to GUIL): And you?
 GUIL: I'd prefer art to mirror life, if it's all the same to you.
 PLAYER: It's all the same to me, sir. (To the grappling LOVERS.)
 All right, no need to indulge yourselves. (They get up-To GUIL.) I come on in a minute. Lucianus, nephew to the
king! (Turns his attention to the
TRAGEDIANS.) Next!
 (They disport themselves to accommodate the next piece of mime, which consists of the PLAYER himself
exhibiting an excitable anguish (choreographed, stylized) leading to an impassioned scene with the QUEEN
(cf. "The Closet Scene", Shakespeare Act III, Scene iv) and a very stylized reconstruction of a POLONIUS figure
being stabbed behind the arras (the murdered KING to stand in for POLONIUS) while the PLAYER himself
continues his breathless commentary for the benefit of ROS and GUIL.)
 PLAYER: Lucianus, nephew to the king ... usurped by his uncle and shattered by his mother's incestuous
marriage ... loses his reason ... throwing the court into turmoil and disarray as he alternates between bitter
melancholy and unrestricted lunacy ... staggering from the suicidal (a pose) to the homicidal (here he kills
"POLONIUS"). ... he at last confronts his mother and in a scene of provocative ambiguity-(a somewhat oedipal
embrace) begs her to repent and recant-- (He springs up, still talking.) The King-(he pushes forward the
POISONER/KING) tormented by guilt-haunted by fear-decides to despatch his nephew to England-and entrusts
this undertaking to two smiling accomplices-friends-courtiers-to two spies- (He has swung round to bring
together the POISONER/KING and the two cloaked TRAGEDIANS; the latter kneel and accept a scroll from the
KING.)
 -giving them a letter to present to the English court--!
 And so they depart-on board ship--
 (The two SPIES position themselves on either side of the PLAYER, and the three of them sway gently in
unison, the motion of a boat; and then the PLAYER detaches himself.)
 -and they arrive-
 (One SPY shades his eyes at the horizon.)
 -and disembark-and present themselves before the English king-(He wheels round.) The English king-- (An
exchange of headgear creates the ENGLISH KING from the remaining player-that is, the PLAYER who played
the original murdered king.)
 But where is the Prince? Where indeed? The plot has thickened-a twist
of fate and cunning has put into their hands a letter that seals their
deaths!
 (The two SPIES present their letter; the ENGLISH KING reads it and orders their deaths. They stand up as
the PLAYER whips off their cloaks preparatory to execution.)
 Traitors hoist by their own petard?-or victims of the gods?-we shall
never know!
 (The whole mime has been fluid and continuous but now ROS moves forward
and brings it to a pause. What brings ROS forward is the fact that under
their cloaks the two SPIES are wearing coats identical to those worn by ROS
and GUIL, whose coats are now covered by their cloaks. ROS approaches "his''
SPY doubtfully. He does not quite understand why the coats are familiar. ROS
stands close, touches the coat, thoughtfully....)
 ROS: Well, if it isn't--! No, wait a minute, don't tell me-it's a long time since-where was it? Ah, this is taking me
back to-when was it? I know you, don't I? I never forget a face-(he looks into the SPY'S face). not that I know yours
that is. For a moment I thought- no, I don't know you, do I? Yes, I'm afraid you're quite wrong. You must have
mistaken me for someone else.
 (GUIL meanwhile has approached the other SPY, brow creased in thought.)
 PLAYER (to GUIL): Are you familiar with this play?
 GUIL: No.
 PLAYER: A slaughterhouse-eight corpses all told. It brings out the best in us.
 GUIL (tense, progressively rattled during the whole mime and commentary): You!-What do you know about
death?
 PLAYER: It's what the actors do best. They have to exploit whatever talent is given to them, and their talent is
dying. They can die heroically, comically, ironically, slowly, suddenly, disgustingly, charmingly, or from a great
height. My own talent is more general. I extract significance from melodrama, a significance which it does not
in fact contain; but occasionally, from out of this matter, there escapes a thin beam of light that, seen at the right
angle, can crack the shell of mortality.
 ROS: Is that all they can do-die?
 PLAYER: No, no-they kill beautifully. In fact some of them kill even better than they die. The rest die better than
they kill. They're a team.
 ROS: Which ones are which?
 PLAYER: There's not much in it.
 GUIL (fear, derision): Actors! The mechanics of cheap melodrama! That isn't death! (More quietly.) You scream
and choke and sink to your knees, but it doesn't bring death home to anyone-it doesn't catch them unawares and
start the whisper in their skulls that says-"One day you are going to die." (He straightens up.) You die so many
times; how can you expect them to believe in your death?
 PLAYER: On the contrary, it's the only kind they do believe. They're conditioned to it. I had an actor once
who was condemned to hang for stealing a sheep-or a lamb, I forget which-so I got permission to have him
hanged in the middle of a play-had to change the plot a bit but I thought it would be effective, you know-and you
wouldn't believe it, he just wasn't convincing! It was impossible to suspend one's, disbelief-and what with the
audience jeering and throwing peanuts, the whole thing was a disaster!-he did nothing but cry all the time-right out
of character-just stood there and cried... Never again.
 (In good humour he has already turned back to the mime: the two SPIES awaiting execution at the hands of
the PLAYER.) Audiences know what to expect, and that is all that they are prepared to believe in. (To the
SPIES.)
 Show!
 (The SPIES die at some length, rather well.)
 (The light has begun to go, and it fades as they die, and as GUIL
speaks.)
 GUIL: No, no, no... you've got it all wrong... you can't act death. The fact of it is nothing to do with seeing it
happen - it's not gasps and blood and falling about - that isn't what makes it death. It's just a man failing
to reappear, that's all - now you see him, now you don't that's the only thing that's real: here one minute and gone
the next and never coming back - an exit, unobtrusive and unannounced, a disappearance gathering weight as it
goes on, until, finally, it is heavy with death.
 (The two SPIES lie still, barely visible. The PLAYER comes forward and
throws the SPIES' cloaks over their bodies. ROS starts to clap, slowly.)
 BLACKOUT.
 (A second of silence, then much noise. Shouts ... "The King rises!" ...
"Give o'er the play!"... and cries for "Lights, lights, lights!")
 (When the light comes, after a few seconds, it comes as a sunrise.)
 (The stage is empty save for two cloaked FIGURES sprawled on the ground in the approximate positions last
held by the dead SPIES. As the light grows, they are seen to be ROS and GUIL, and to be resting quite
comfortably. ROS raises himself on his elbows and shades his eyes as he stares into the auditorium. Finally:)
 ROS: That must be east, then. I think we can assume that.
 GUIL: I'm assuming nothing.
 ROS: No, it's all right. That's the sun. East.
 GUIL (looks up): Where?
 ROS: I watched it come up.
 GUIL: No... it was light all the time, you see, and you opened your
eyes very, very slowly. If you'd been facing back there you'd be swearing that was east.
 ROS (standing up): You're a mass of prejudice.
 GUIL: I've been taken in before.
 ROS (looks out over the audience): Rings a bell.
 GUIL: They're waiting to see what we're going to do.
 ROS: Good old east.
 GUIL: As soon as we make a move they'll come pouring in from every side, shouting obscure instructions,
confusing us with ridiculous remarks, messing us about from here to breakfast and getting our names wrong.
 (ROS starts to protest but he has hardly opened his mouth before:)
 CLAUDIUS (off-stage - with urgency): Ho, Guildenstern!
 (GUIL is still prone. Small pause.)
 ROS AND GUIL: You're wanted...
 (GUIL furiously leaps to his feet as CLAUDIUS and GERTRUDE enter. They are in some desperation.)
 CLAUDIUS: Friends both, go join you with some further aid: Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain, and from
his mother's closet hath he dragged him. Go seek him out; speak fair and bring the body into the chapel. I pray
you haste in this. (As he and GERTRUDE are hurrying out.) Come Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends and
let them know both what we mean to do...
 (They've gone.)
 (ROS and GUIL remain quite still.)
 GUIL: Well....
 ROS: Quite....
 GUIL: Well, well.
 ROS: Quite; quite. (Nods with spurious confidence.) Seek him out.
 (Pause.) Etcetera.
 GUIL: Quite.
 ROS: Well. (Small pause.) Well, that's a step in the right direction.
 GUIL: You didn't like him?
 ROS: Who?
 GUIL: Good God, I hope more tears are shed for us! ...
 ROS: Well, it's progress, isn't it? Something positive. Seek him out. (Looks round without moving his feet)
Where does one begin... ? (Takes one step towards the wings and halts.)
 GUIL: Well, that's a step in the right direction.
 ROS: You think so? He could be anywhere.
 GUIL: All right-you go that way, I'll go this way.
 ROS: Right.
 (They walk towards opposite wings. ROS halts.)
 No.
 (GUIL halts.)
 You go this way-I'll go that way.
 GUIL: All right.
 (They march towards each other, cross. ROS halts.)
 ROS: Wait a minute.
 (GUIL halts.)
 I think we should stick together. He might be violent.
 GUIL: Good point. I'll come with you.
 (GUIL marches across to ROS. They turn to leave. ROS halts.)
 ROS: No, I'll come with you...
 GUIL: Right.
 (They turn, march across to the opposite wing. ROS halts. GUIL halts.)
 ROS: I'll come with you, my way.
 GUIL: All right.
 (They turn again and march across. ROS halts. GUIL halts.)
 ROS: I've just thought. If we both go, he could come here. That would be stupid, wouldn't it?
 GUIL: All right-I'll stay, you go.
 ROS: Right.
 (GUIL marches to midstage.)
 I say.
 (GUIL wheels and carries on marching back towards ROS who starts marching downstage. They cross. ROS
halts.)
 I've just thought.
 (GUIL halts.)
 We ought to stick together; he might be violent.
 GUIL: Good point.
 (GUIL marches down to join ROS. They stand still for a moment in their original positions.)
 Well, at last we're getting somewhere.
 (Pause.)
 GUIL: Of course, he might not come.
 ROS (airily): Oh, he'll come.
 GUIL: We'd have some explaining to do.
 ROS: He'll come. (Airily wanders upstage.) Don't worry-take my word for it-(looks out-is appalled.) He's coming!
 GUIL: What's he doing?
 ROS: Walking.
 GUIL: Alone?
 ROS: No.
 GUIL: Who's with him?
 ROS: The old man.
 GUIL: Walking?
 ROS: No.
 GUIL: Not walking?
 ROS: No.
 GUIL: Ah. That's an opening if ever there was one. (And is suddenly galvanized into action.) Let him walk into
the trap!
 ROS: What trap?
 GUIL: You stand there! Don't let him pass!
 (He positions ROS with his back to one wing, facing HAMLET's entrance.)
 (GUIL positions himself next to ROS, a few feet away, so that they are covering one side of the stage, facing the
opposite side. GUIL unfastens his belt. ROS does the same. They join the two belts, and hold them taut between
them. ROS's trousers slide slowly down.)
 (HAMLET enters opposite, slowly, dragging POLONIUS's BODY. He enters upstage, makes a small arc and
leaves by the same side, a few feet downstage.)
 (ROS and GUIL, holding the belts taut, stare at him in some bewilderment.)
 (HAMLET leaves, dragging the BODY. They relax the strain on the belts.)
 ROS: That was close.
 GUIL: There's a limit to what two people can do.
 (They undo the belts: ROS pulls up his trousers.)
 ROS (worriedly-he walks a few paces towards HAMLET's exit): He was dead.
 GUIL: Of course he's dead!
 ROS (turns to GUIL): Properly.
 GUIL (angrily): Death's death, isn't it?
 (ROS falls silent. Pause.)
 Perhaps he'll come back this way.
 (ROS starts to take off his belt.)
 No, no, no!-if we can't learn by experience, what else have we got?
 (ROS desists.)
 (Pause.)
 ROS: Give him a shout.
 GUIL: I thought we'd been into all that.
 ROS (shouts): Hamlet!
 GUIL: Don't be absurd.
 ROS (shouts): Lord Hamlet!
 (HAMLET enters. ROS is a little dismayed.)
 What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
 HAMLET: Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
 ROS: Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence and bear it to the chapel.
 HAMLET: Do not believe it.
 ROS: Believe what?
 HAMLET: That I can keep your counsel and not mine own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
replication should be made by the son of a king?
 ROS: Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
 HAMLET: Ay, sir, that soaks up the king's countenance, his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the King
best service in the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed, to be last
swallowed. When he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry again.
 ROS: I understand you not, my lord.
 HAMLET: I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
 ROS: My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to the King.
 HAMLET: The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body. The King is a thing-
 GUIL: A thing, my lord -?
 HAMLET: Of nothing. Bring me to him.
 (HAMLET moves resolutely towards one wing. They move with him, shepherding. Just before they reach
the exit, HAMLET, apparently seeing CLAUDIUS approaching from off stage, bends low in a sweeping bow. ROS
and GUIL, cued by HAMLET, also bow deeply-a sweeping ceremonial bow with their cloaks swept round them.
HAMLET, however, continues the movement into an about-turn and walks off in the opposite direction. ROS and
GUIL, with their heads low, do not notice. No one comes on. ROS and GUIL squint upwards and
find that they are bowing to nothing.
 CLAUDIUS enters behind them. At his first words they leap up and do a double-take.)
 CLAUDIUS: How now? What hath befallen?
 ROS: Where the body is bestowed, my lord, we cannot get from him.
 CLAUDIUS: But where is he?
 ROS (fractional hesitation): Without, my lord; guarded to know your pleasure.
 CLAUDIUS (moves): Bring him before us.
 (This hits ROS between the eyes but only his eyes show it. Again his hesitation is fractional. And then with
great deliberation he turns to GUIL.)
 ROS: Ho! Bring in the lord.
 (Again there is a fractional moment in which ROS is smug, CUIL is trapped and betrayed. GUIL opens his
mouth and closes it.)
 (The situation is saved;)
 (HAMLET, escorted, is marched in just as CLAUDIUS leaves. HAMLET and his ESCORT cross the stage and
go out, following CLAUDIUS.)
 (Lighting changes to Exterior.)
 ROS (moves to go): All right, then?
 GUIL (does not move: thoughtfully): And yet it doesn't seem enough; to have breathed such significance. Can
that be ail? And why us?-anybody would have done. And we have contributed nothing.
 ROS: It was a trying episode while it lasted, but they've done with us now.
 GUIL: Done what?
 ROS: I don't pretend to have understood. Frankly, I'm not very interested. If they won't tell us, that's their
affair. (He wanders upstage towards the exit.) For my part, I'm only glad that that's the last we've seen of him-
(And he glances offstage and turns front, his face betraying the fact that HAMLET is there.)
 GUIL: I knew it wasn't the end....
 ROS (high): What else?!
 GUIL: We're taking him to England. What's he doing?
 (ROS goes upstage and returns.)
 ROS: Talking.
 GUIL: To himself?
 (ROS makes to go, GUIL cuts him off.)
 Is he alone?
 ROS: No, he's with a soldier,
 GUIL: Then he's not talking to himself, is he?
 ROS: Not by himself... Should we go?
 GUIL: Where?
 ROS: Anywhere.
 GUIL: Why?
 (ROS puts up his head listening.)
 ROS: There it is again. (In anguish.) All I ask is a change of ground!
 GUIL (coda): Give us this day our daily round...
 (HAMLET enters behind them, talking with a soldier in arms. ROS and GUIL don't look round.)
 ROS: They'll have us hanging about till we're dead. At least. And the weather will change. (Looks up.) The
spring can't last for ever.
 HAMLET: Good sir, whose powers are these?
 SOLDIER: They are of Norway, sir.
 HAMLET: How purposed, sir, I pray you?
 SOLDIER: Against some part of Poland.
 HAMLET: Who commands them, sir?
 SOLDIER: The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
 ROS: We'll be cold. The summer won't last.
 GUIL: It's autumnal.
 ROS (examining the ground): No leaves.
 GUIL: Autumnal-nothing to do with leaves. It is to do with a certain brownness at the edges of the day... Brown
is creeping up on us, take my word for it... Russets and tangerine shades of old gold flushing the very
outside edge of the senses... deep shining ochres, burnt umber and parchments of baked earth-reflecting on
itself and through itself, filtering the light. At such times, perhaps, coincidentally, the leaves might fall,
somewhere, by repute. Yesterday was blue, like smoke.
 ROS (head up, listening): I got it again then.
 (They listen-faintest sound of TRAGEDIANS' band.)
 HAMLET: I humbly thank you, sir.
 SOLDIER: God by you, sir. (Exit.)
 (ROS gets up quickly and goes to HAMLET.)
 ROS: Will it please you go, my lord?
 HAMLET: I'll be with you straight. Go you a little before.
 (HAMLET turns to face upstage. ROS returns down. GUIL faces front, doesn't turn.)
 GUIL: Is he there?
 ROS: Yes.
 GUIL: What's he doing?
 (ROS looks over his shoulder.)
 ROS: Talking.
 GUIL: To himself?
 ROS: Yes.
 (Pause. ROS makes to leave.)
 ROS: He said we can go. Cross my heart.
 GUIL: I like to know where I am. Even if I don't know where I am, I like to know that. If we go there's no
knowing.
 ROS: No knowing what?
 GUIL: If we'll ever come back.
 ROS: We don't want to come back.
 GUIL: That may very well be true, but do we want to go?
 ROS: We'll be free.
 GUIL: I don't know. It's the same sky.
 ROS: We've come this far.
 (He moves towards exit. GUIL follows him.)
 And besides, anything could happen yet.
 (They go.)
 BLACKOUT

 Act three
 Opens in pitch darkness.
 Soft sea sounds.
 After several seconds of nothing, a voice from the dark .
 GUIL: Are you there?
 ROS: Where?
 GUIL (bitterly): A flying start....
 (Pause.)
 ROS: Is that you?
 GUIL: Yes.
 ROS: How do you know?
 GUIL (explosion): Oh-for-God's-sake!
 ROS: We're not finished, then?
 GUIL: Well, we're here, aren't we?
 ROS: Are we? I can't see a thing.
 GUIL: You can still think, can't you?
 ROS: I think so.
 GUIL: You can still talk.
 ROS: What should I say?
 GUIL: Don't bother. You can feel, can't you?
 ROS: Ah! There's life in me yet!
 GUIL: What are you feeling?
 ROS: A leg. Yes, it feels like my leg.
 GUIL: How does it feel?
 ROS: Dead.
 GUIL: Dead?
 ROS (panic): I can't feel a thing!
 GUIL: Give it a pinch! (Immediately he yelps.)
 ROS: Sorry.
 GUIL: Well, that's cleared that up.
 (Longer pause: the sound builds a little and identifies itself-the sea. Ship timbers, wind in the rigging, and then
shouts of sailors calling obscure but inescapably nautical instructions from all directions, far and near: A short list:
 Hard a larboard!
 Let go the stays!
 Reef down me hearties!
 Is that you, cox'n?
 Hel-llo! Is that you?
 Hard a port!
 Easy as she goes!
 Keep her steady on the lee!
 Haul away, lads!
 SNATCHES OF SEA SHANTY MAYBE
 Fly the jib!
 Tops'I up, me maties!)
 (When the point has been well made and more so.)
 ROS: We're on a boat. (Pause.) Dark, isn't it?
 GUIL: Not for night.
 ROS: No, not for night.
 GUIL: Dark for day.
 (Pause.)
 ROS: Oh yes, it's dark for day.
 GUIL: We must have gone north, of course.
 ROS: Off course?
 GUIL: Land of the midnight sun, that is.
 ROS: Of course.
 (Some sailor sounds.)
 (A lantern is lit upstage-in fact by HAMLET.)
 (The stage lightens disproportionately.)
 (Enough to see:
 ROS and GUIL sitting downstage.)
 (Vague shapes of rigging, etc., behind.)
 I think it's getting light.
 GUIL: Not for night.
 ROS: This far north.
 GUIL: Unless we're off course.
 ROS (small pause): Of course.
 (A better light-Lantern? Moon? ... Light.)
 (Revealing, among other things, three large man-sized casks on deck, upended, with lids. Spaced but in line.
Behind and above-a gaudy striped umbrella, on a pole stuck into the deck, tilted so that we do not see behind
it-one of those huge six-foot diameter jobs. Still dim upstage.)
 (ROS and GUIL still facing front.)
 ROS: Yes, it's lighter than it was. It'll be night soon. This far north. (Dolefully.) I suppose we'll have to go to
sleep. (He yawns and stretches.)
 GUIL: Tired?
 ROS: No.... I don't think I'd take to it. Sleep all night, can't see a thing all day.... Those eskimos must have a quiet
life.
 GUIL: Where?
 ROS: What?
 GUIL: I thought you - (Relapses.) I've lost all capacity for disbelief. I'm not sure that I could even rise to a little
gentle scepticism. (Pause.)
 ROS: Well, shall we stretch our legs?
 GUIL: I don't feel like stretching my legs.
 ROS: I'll stretch them for you, if you like.
 GUIL: No.
 ROS: We could stretch each other's. That way we wouldn't have to go anywhere.
 GUIL (pause): No, somebody might come in.
 ROS: In where?
 GUIL: Out here.
 ROS: In out here?
 GUIL: On deck.
 (ROS considers the floor: slaps it.)
 ROS: Nice bit of planking, that.
 GUIL: Yes, I'm very fond of boats myself. I like the way they're-contained. You don't have to worry about
which way to go, or whether to go at all-the question doesn't arise, because you're on a boat, aren't you? Boats are
safe areas in the game of tag ... the players will hold their positions until the music starts.... I think I'll spend most of
my life on boats.
 ROS: Very healthy.
 (ROS inhales with expectation, exhales with boredom. GUIL stands up and looks over the audience.)
 GUIL: One is free on a boat. For a time. Relatively.
 ROS: What's it like?
 GUIL: Rough.
 (ROS joins him. They look out over the audience.)
 ROS: I think I'm going to be sick.
 (GUIL licks a finger, holds it up experimentally.)
 GUIL: Other side, I think.
 (ROS goes upstage: Ideally a sort of upper deck joined to the downstage lower deck by short steps. The umbrella
being on the upper deck. ROS pauses by the umbrella and looks behind it.)
 (GUIL meanwhile has been resuming his own theme - looking out over the audience - )
 Free to move, speak, extemporise, and yet. We have not been cut loose. Our truancy is defined by one fixed
star, and our drift represents merely a slight chance of angle to it: we may seize the moment, toss it around while
the moment pass, a short dash here, an exploration there, but we are brought round full circle to face again the
single immutable fact - that we, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, are taking Hamlet to England.
 (By which time, ROS has returned, tiptoeing with great import, teeth clenched for secrecy, get to GUIL, points
surreptitiously behind him - and a tight whisper:)
 ROS: I say - he's here!
 GUIL (unsurprised): What's he doing?
 ROS: Sleeping.
 GUIL: It's all right for him.
 ROS: What is?
 GUIL: He can sleep.
 ROS: It's all right for him.
 GUIL: He's got us now.
 ROS: He can sleep. 
ROS: We're on a boat. (Pause.) Dark, isn't it?
 GU
 ROS: We could stretch each other's. That way we wouldn't have to go anywhere.
 GUIL (pause): No, somebody might come in.
 ROS: In where?
 GUIL: Out here.
 ROS: In out here?
 GUIL: On deck.
 (ROS considers the floor: slaps it.)
 ROS: Nice bit of planking, that.
 GUIL: Yes, I'm very fond of boats myself. I like the way they're-contained. You don't have to worry about
which way to go, or whether to go at all-the question doesn't arise, because you're on a boat, aren't you? Boats are
safe areas in the game of tag ... the players will hold their positions until the music starts.... I think I'll spend most of
my life on boats.
 ROS: Very healthy.
 (ROS inhales with expectation, exhales with boredom. GUIL stands up and looks over the audience.)
 GUIL: One is free on a boat. For a time. Relatively.
 ROS: What's it like?
 GUIL: Rough.
 (ROS joins him. They look out over the audience.)
 ROS: I think I'm going to be sick.
 (GUIL licks a finger, holds it up experimentally.)
 GUIL: Other side, I think.
 (ROS goes upstage: Ideally a sort of upper deck joined to the downstage lower deck by short steps. The umbrella
being on the upper deck. ROS pauses by the umbrella and looks behind it.)
 (GUIL meanwhile has been resuming his own theme - looking out over the audience - )
 Free to move, speak, extemporise, and yet. We have not been cut loose. Our truancy is defined by one fixed
star, and our drift represents merely a slight chance of angle to it: we may seize the moment, toss it around while
the moment pass, a short dash here, an exploration there, but we are brought round full circle to face again the
single immutable fact - that we, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, are taking Hamlet to England.
 (By which time, ROS has returned, tiptoeing with great import, teeth clenched for secrecy, get to GUIL, points
surreptitiously behind him - and a tight whisper:)
 ROS: I say - he's here!
 GUIL (unsurprised): What's he doing?
 ROS: Sleeping.
 GUIL: It's all right for him.
 ROS: What is?
 GUIL: He can sleep.
 ROS: It's all right for him.
 GUIL: He's got us now.
 ROS: He can sleep.
 GUIL: It's all done for him.
 ROS: He's got us.
 GUIL: And we've got nothing. (A cry.) All I ask is our common due!
 ROS: For those in peril of the sea...
 GUIL: Give us this day our daily cue.
 (Beat, pause. Sit. Long pause.)
 ROS (after shifting, looking around): What now?
 GUIL: What do you mean?
 ROS: Well, nothing is happening.
 GUIL: We're on a boat.
 ROS: I'm aware of that.
 GUIL (angrily): Then what do you expect? (Unhappily.) We act on scraps of information... sifting halfremembered directions that we can hardly separate from instinct.
 (ROS puts a hand into his purse, then both hands behind his back, then holds his fists out.)
 (GUIL taps one fist.)
 (ROS opens it to show a coin.)
 (He gives it to GUIL.)
 (He puts his hand back into his purse. Then both hands behind his back, then holds his fists out.)
 (GUIL taps one fist.)
 (ROS opens it to show a coin. He gives it to GUIL.)
 (Repeat.)
 (Repeat.)
 (GUIL getting tense. Desperate to lose.)
 (Repeat.)
 (GUIL taps a hand, changes his mind, taps the other, and ROS inadvertently reveals that he has a coin in
both fists.)
 GUIL: You had money in both hands.
 ROS (embarrassed): Yes.
 GUIL: Every time?
 ROS: Yes.
 GUIL: What's the point of that?
 ROS (pathetic): I wanted to make you happy.
 (Beat.)
 GUIL: How much did he give you?
 ROS: Who?
 GUIL: The king. He gave us some money.
 ROS: How much did he give you?
 GUIL: I asked you first.
 ROS: I got the same as you.
 GUIL: He wouldn't discriminate between us.
 ROS: How much did you get?
 GUIL: The same.
 ROS: How do you know?
 GUIL: You just told me - how do you know?
 ROS: He wouldn't discriminate between us.
 GUIL: Even if he could.
 ROS: Which he never could.
 GUIL: He couldn't even be sure of mixing us up.
 ROS: Without mixing us up.
 GUIL (turning on him furiously): Why don't you say something original! No wonder the whole thing is so
stagnant! You don't take me up on anything-you just repeat it in a different order.
 ROS: I can't think of anything original. I'm only good in support.
 GUIL: I'm sick of making the running.
 ROS (humbly): It must be your dominant personality. (Almost in tears.) Oh, what's going to become of us!
 (And GUIL comforts him, all harshness gone.)
 GUIL: Don't cry... it's all right... there... there, I'll see we're all right.
 ROS: But we've got nothing to go on, we're out on our own.
 GUIL: We're on our way to England - we're taking Hamlet there.
 ROS: What for?
 GUIL: What for? Where have you been?
 ROS: When? (Pause.) We won't know what to do when we get there.
 GUIL: We take him to the king.
 ROS: Will he be there?
 GUIL: No - the king of England.
 ROS: He's expecting us?
 GUIL: No.
 ROS: He won't know what we're playing at. What are we going to say?
 GUIL: We've got a letter. You remember the letter.
 ROS: Do I?
 GUIL: Everything is explained in the letter. We count on that.
 ROS: Is that it, then?
 GUIL: What?
 ROS: We take Hamlet to the English king, we hand over the letter – what then?
 GUIL: There may be something in the letter to keep us going a bit.
 ROS: And if not?
 GUIL: Then that's it-we're finished.
 ROS: At a loose end?
 GUIL: Yes.
 (Pause.)
 ROS: Are there likely to be loose ends? (Pause.) Who is the English King?
 GUIL: That depends on when we get there.
 ROS: What do you think it says?
 GUIL: Oh... greetings. Expressions of loyalty. Asking of favours, calling in of debts. Obscure promises
balanced by vague threats.... Diplomacy. Regards to the family.
 ROS: And about Hamlet?
 GUIL: Oh yes.
 ROS: And us-the full background?
 GUIL: I should say so.
 (Pause.)
 ROS: So we've got a letter which explains everything.
 GUIL: You've got it.
 (ROS takes that literally. He starts to pat his pockets, etc.)
 What's the matter?
 ROS: The letter.
 GUIL: Have you got it?
 ROS (rising fear): Have I? (Searches frantically.) Where would I have put it?
 GUIL: You can't have lost it.
 ROS: I must have!
 GUIL: That's odd-I thought he gave it to me.
 (ROS looks at him hopefully.)
 ROS: Perhaps he did.
 GUIL: But you seemed so sure it was you who hadn't got it.
 ROS (high): It was me who hadn't got it!
 GUIL: But if he gave it to me there's no reason why you should have had it in the first place, in which case I don't
see what all the fuss is about you not having it.
 ROS (pause): I admit it's confusing.
 GUIL: This is all getting rather undisciplined... The boat, the night, the sense of isolation and uncertainty... all
these induce a loosening of the concentration. We must not lose control. Tighten up. Now. Either you
have lost the letter or you didn't have it to lose in the first place, in which case the king never gave it to you, in
which case he gave it to me, in which case I would have put it into my inside top pocket in which case
(calmly producing the letter)... it will be... here. (They smile at each other.) We mustn't drop off like that again.
 (Pause. ROS takes the letter gently from him.)
 ROS: Now that we have found it, why were we looking for it?
 GUIL (thinks): We thought it was lost.
 ROS: Something else?
 GUIL: No.
 (Deflation.)
 ROS: Now we've lost the tension.
 GUIL: What tension?
 ROS: What was the last thing I said before we wandered off?
 GUIL: When was that?
 ROS (helplessly): I can't remember.
 GUIL (leaping up): What a shambles! We're just not getting anywhere.
 ROS (mournfully): Not even England. I don't believe in it anyway.
 GUIL: What?
 ROS: England.
 GUIL: Just a conspiracy of cartographers, you mean?
 ROS: I mean I don't believe it! (Calmer.) I have no image. I try to picture us arriving, a little harbour perhaps...
roads... inhabitants to point the way... horses on the road... riding for a day or a fortnight and then a palace and
the English king,... That would be the logical kind of thing... But my mind remains a blank. No. We're slipping off the
map.
 GUIL: Yes... yes... (Rallying.) But you don't believe anything till it happens. And it has all happened. Hasn't it?
 ROS: We drift down time, clutching at straws. But what good's a brick to a drowning man?
 GUIL: Don't give up, we can't be long now.
 ROS: We might as well be dead. Do you think death could possibly be a boat?
 GUIL: No, no, no... Death is... not. Death isn't. You take my meaning. Death is the ultimate negative. Not-being.
You can't not-be on a boat.
 ROS: I've frequently not been on boats.
 GUIL: No, no, no - what you've been is not on boats.
 ROS: I wish I was dead. (Considers the drop.) I could jump over the side. That would put a spoke in their
wheel.
 GUIL: Unless they're counting on it.
 ROS: I shall remain on board. That'll put a spoke in their wheel.
 (The futility of it, fury.) All right! We don't question, we don't doubt. We perform. But a line must be drawn
somewhere, and I would like to put it on record that I have no confidence in England. Thank you. (Thinks
about this.) And even if it's true, it'll just be another shambles.
 GUIL: I don't see why.
 ROS (furious): He won't know what we're talking about - What are we going to say?
 GUIL: We say - Your majesty, we have arrived.
 ROS (kingly): And who are you?
 GUIL: We are Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
 ROS (barks): Never heard of you!
 GUIL: Well, we're nobody special -
 ROS (regal and nasty): What's your game?
 GUIL: We've got our instructions -
 ROS: First I've heard of it -
 GUIL (angrily): Let me finish - (Humble.) We've come from Denmark,
 ROS: What do you want?
 GUIL: Nothing-we're delivering Hamlet -
 ROS: Who's he?
 GUIL (irritated): You've heard of him--
 ROS: Oh, I've heard of him all right and I want nothing to do with it.
 GUIL: But -
 ROS: You march in here without so much as a by your leave and expect me to take every lunatic you try to pass
off with a lot of unsubstantiated -
 GUIL: We've got a letter -
 (ROS snatches it and tears it open.)
 ROS (efficiently): I see... I see... well, this seems to support your story such as it is - it is an exact command
from the king of Denmark, for several different reasons, importing Denmark's health and England's too,
that on the reading of this letter, without delay, I should have Hamlet's head cut off -!
 (GUIL snatches the letter. ROS, doubletaking, snatches it back, GUIL snatches it halfback. They read it
together, and separate.)
 (Pause.)
 (They are well downstage looking front.)
 ROS: The sun's going down. It will be dark soon.
 GUIL: Do you think so?
 ROS: I was just making conversation. (Pause.) We're his friends.
 GUIL: How do you know?
 ROS: From our young days brought up with him.
 GUIL: You've only got their word for it.
 ROS: But that's what we depend on.
 GUIL: Well, yes, and then again no. (Airily.) Let us keep things in proportion. Assume, if you like, that they're
going to kill him. Well, he is a man, he is mortal, death comes to us all, etcetera, and consequently he
would have died anyway, sooner or later. Or to look at it from the social point of view-he's just one man among
many, the loss would be well within reason and convenience. And then again, what is so terrible about death? As
Socrates so philosophically put it, since we don't know what death is, it is illogical to fear it. It might be... very nice.
Certainly it is a release from the burden of life, and, for the godly, a haven and a reward. Or to look at it another
way - we are little men, we don't know the ins and outs of the matter, there are wheels within wheels, etcetera -
it would be presumptuous of us to interfere with the designs of fate or even of kings. All in all, I think we'd be well
advised to leave well alone. Tie up the letter - there - neatly - like that - They won't notice the broken seal,
assuming you were in character.
 ROS: But what's the point?
 GUIL: Don't apply logic.
 ROS: He's done nothing to us.
 GUIL: Or justice.
 ROS: It's awful.
 GUIL: But it could have been worse. I was beginning to think it was. (And his relief comes out in a laugh.)
 (Behind them HAMLET appears from behind the umbrella. The light has been going. Slightly. HAMLET is going
to the lantern.)
 ROS: The position as I see it, then. We, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, from our young days brought up with
him, awakened by a man standing on his saddle, are summoned, and arrive, and are instructed to glean what
afflicts him and draw him on to pleasures, such as a play, which unfortunately, as it turns out, is abandoned in some
confusion owing to certain nuances outside our appreciation - which, among other causes, results in, among
other effects, a high, not to say, homicidal, excitement in Hamlet, whom we, in consequence, are escorting, for his
own good, to England. Good. We're on top of it now.
(HAMLET blows out the lantern. The stage goes pitch black.)
 (The Black resolves itself to moonlight, by which HAMLET approaches the sleeping ROS and GUIL. He
extracts the letter and takes it behind his umbrella; the tight of his lantern shines through the fabric, HAMLET
emerges again with a letter, and replaces it, and retires, blowing out his lantern.)
 (Morning comes.)
 (ROS watches it coming-from the auditorium. Behind him is a gay sight. Beneath the re-tilted umbrella, reclining
in a deckchair, wrapped in a rug, reading a book, possibly smoking, sits Hamlet.)
 (ROS watches the morning come, and brighten to high noon.)
 ROS: I'm assuming nothing. (He stands up. GUIL wakes.) The position as I see it, then. That's west unless
we're off course, in which case it's night; the king gave me the same as you, the king gave you the same as me:
the king never gave me the letter, the king gave you the letter, we don't know what's in the letter; we take Hamlet
to the English king, it depending on when we get there who he is, and we hand over the letter, which may or
may not have something in it to keep us going, and if not, we are finished and at a loose end, if they have loose
ends. We could have done worse. I don't think we missed any chance... Not that we're getting much help. (He
sits down again. They lie down - prone.) If we stopped breathing we'd vanish.
 (The muffled sound of a recorder. They sit up with disproportionate interest.) Here we go.
 Yes, but what?
 (They listen to the music.)
 GUIL (excitedly): Out of the void, finally, a sound; while on a boat (admittedly) outside the action (admittedly)
the perfect and absolute silence of the wet lazy slap of water against water and the rolling creak of timber-breaks;
giving rise at once to the speculation or the assumption or the hope that something is about to happen; a pipe is
heard. One of the sailors has pursed his lips against a woodwind, his fingers and thumb governing, shall we
say, the ventages, whereupon, giving it breath, let us say, with his mouth, it, the pipe, discourses, as the saying
goes, most eloquent music. A thing like that, it could change the course of events.
(Pause.) Go and see what it is.
 ROS: It's someone playing on a pipe.
 GUIL: Go and find him.
 ROS: And then what?
 GUIL: I don't know - request a tune.
 ROS: What for?
 GUIL: Quick-before we lose our momentum.
 ROS: Why!-something is happening. It had quite escaped my attention!
 (He listens: Makes a stab at an exit. Listens more carefully: Changes direction:)
 (GUIL takes no notice.)
 (ROS wanders about trying to decide where the music comes from. Finally he tracks it down - unwillingly - to the
middle barrel. There is no getting away from it. He turns to GUIL who takes no notice. ROS, during this whole
business, never quite breaks into articulate speech. His face and his hands indicate his incredulity. He stands
gazing at the middle barrel. The pipe plays on within. He kicks the barrel. The pipe stops. He leaps back towards
GUIL. The pipe starts up again. He approaches the barrel cautiously. He lifts the lid. The music is louder. He
slams down the lid. The music is softer. He goes back towards GUIL. But a drum starts, muffled. He freezes.
He turns. Considers the left-hand barrel. The drumming goes on within, in time to the flute. He walks back to
GUIL. He opens his mouth to speak. Doesn't make it. A lute is heard. He spins round at the third barrel. More
instruments join in. Until it is quite inescapable that inside the three barrels, distributed, playing together a familiar
tune which has been heard three times before, are the TRAGEDIANS.)
 (They play on.)
 (ROS sits beside GUIL. They stare ahead.)
 (The tune comes to an end.)
 (Pause.)
 ROS: I thought I heard a band. (In anguish.) Plausibility is all I presume!
 GUIL (coda): Call us this day our daily tune....
 (The lid of the middle barrel flies open and the PLAYER's head pops out.)
 PLAYER: Aha! All in the same boat, then! (He climbs out. He goes round banging on the barrels.)
 Everybody out!
 (Impossibly, the TRAGEDIANS climb out of the barrels. With their instruments, but not their cart. A few
bundles. Except ALFRED. The PLAYER is cheerful.)
 (To ROS.) Where are we?
 ROS: Travelling.
 PLAYER: Of course, we haven't got there yet.
 ROS: Are we all right for England?
 PLAYER: You look all right to me. I don't think they're very particular in England. Al-I-fred!
 (ALFRED emerges from the PLAYER's barrel.)
 GUIL: What are you doing here?
 PLAYER: Travelling. (To TRAGEDIANS.) Right-blend into the background!
 (The TRAGEDIANS are in costume (from the mime): A King with crown,
ALFRED as Queen, Poisoner and the two Cloaked figures.)
 (They blend.)
 (To GUIL.) Pleased to see us? (Pause.) You've come out of it very well,
so far.
 GUIL: And you?
 PLAYER: In disfavour. Our play offended the king.
 GUIL: Yes.
 PLAYER: Well, he's a second husband himself. Tactless, really.
 ROS: It was quite a good play nevertheless.
 PLAYER: We never really got going-it was getting quite interesting when they stopped it.
 (Looks up at HAMLET.)
 That's the way to travel...
 GUIL: What were you doing in there?
 PLAYER: Hiding. (Indicating costumes.) We had to run for it just as we were.
 ROS: Stowaways.
 PLAYER: Naturally-we didn't get paid, owing to circumstances ever so slightly beyond our control, and all the
money we had we lost betting on certainties. Life is a gamble, at terrible odds-if it was a bet you wouldn't
take it. Did you know that any number doubled is even?
 ROS: Is it?
 PLAYER: We learn something every day, to our cost. But we troupers just go on and on. Do you know what
happens to old actors?
 ROS: What?
 PLAYER: Nothing. They're still acting. Surprised, then?
 GUIL: What?
 PLAYER: Surprised to see us?
 GUIL: I knew it wasn't the end.
 PLAYER: With practically everyone on his feet. What do you make of it, so far?
 GUIL: We haven't got much to go on.
 PLAYER: You speak to him?
 ROS: It's possible.
 GUIL: But it wouldn't make any difference.
 ROS: But it's possible.
 GUIL: Pointless.
 ROS: It's allowed.
 GUIL: Allowed, yes. We are not restricted. No boundaries have been defined, no inhibitions imposed. We
have, for the while, secured, or blundered into, our release, for the while. Spontaneity and whim are the
order of the day. Other wheels are turning but they are not our concern. We can breathe. We can relax. We can do
what we like and say what we like to whomever we like, without restriction.
 ROS: Within limits, of course.
 GUIL: Certainly within limits.
 (HAMLET comes down to footlights and regards the audience. The others watch but don't speak. HAMLET
clears his throat noisily and spits into the audience. A split second later he claps his hand to his eye and wipes
himself. He goes back upstage.)ROS: A compulsion towards philosophical introspection is his chief characteristic, if I may put it like that. It
does not mean he is mad. It does mean he isn't. Very often, it does not mean anything at all. Which may
or may not be a k
 To my sword's length!
 Action!
 (All four reach the top, see something they don't like, waver, run for their lives downstage:)
 (HAMLET, in the lead, leaps into the left barrel. PLAYER leaps into the right barrel. ROS and GUIL leap into the
middle barrel. All closing the lids after them.)
 (The lights dim to nothing while the sound of fighting continues. The sound fades to nothing. The lights come
up.)
 (The middle barrel (ROS's and GUIL's) is missing.)
 (The lid of the right-hand barrel is raised cautiously, the heads of ROS and GUIL appear.)
 (The lid of the other barrel (HAMLET's) is raised. The head of the PLAYER appears.)
 (All catch sight of each other and slam down lids.)
 (Pause.)
 (Lids raised cautiously.)
 ROS (relief): They've gone. (He starts to climb out.) That was close. I've never thought quicker.
 (They are all three out of barrels. GUIL is wary and nervous. ROS is
light-headed. The PLAYER is phlegmatic. They note the missing barrel.)
 (ROS look round.)
 ROS: Where's -?
 (The PLAYER takes off his hat in mourning.)
 PLAYER: Once more, alone-on our own resources.
 GUIL (worried): What do you mean? Where is he?
 PLAYER: Gone.
 GUIL: Gone where?
 PLAYER: Yes, we were dead lucky there. If that's the word I'm after.
 ROS (not a pick up): Dead?
 PLAYER: Lucky.
 ROS (he means): Is he dead?
 PLAYER: Who knows?
 GUIL (rattled): He's not coming back?
 PLAYER: Hardly.
 ROS: He's dead then. He's dead as far as we're concerned.
 PLAYER: Or we are as far as he is. (He goes and sits on the floor to one side.) Not too bad, is it?
 GUIL (rattled): But he can't - We're supposed to be - We've got a letter-We're going to England with a letter for
the king -
 PLAYER: Yes, that much seems certain. I congratulate you on the unambiguity of your situation.
 GUIL: But you don't understand - it contains - we've had our instructions - The whole thing's pointless
without him.
 PLAYER: Pirates could happen to anyone. Just deliver the letter. They'll send ambassadors from England to
explain...
 GUIL (worked up): Can't see - the pirates left us home and high – dry and home -drome- (furiously). The pirates
left us high and dry!
 PLAYER (comforting): There...
 GUIL (near tears): Nothing will be resolved without him...
 PLAYER: There... !
 GUIL: We need Hamlet for our release!
 PLAYER: There!
 GUIL: What are we supposed to do?
 PLAYER: This.
 (He turns away, lies down if he likes. ROS and GUIL apart.)
 ROS: Saved again.
 GUIL: Saved for what?
 (ROS sighs.)
 ROS: The sun's going down. (Pause.) It'll be night soon. (Pause.) If that's west. (Pause.) Unless we've -
 GUIL (shouts): Shut up! I'm sick of it! Do you think conversation is going to help us now?
 ROS (hurt, desperately ingratiating): I - I bet you all the money I've got the year of my birth doubled is an odd
number.
 GUIL (moan): No-o.
 ROS: Your birth!
 (GUIL smashes him down.)
 GUIL (broken): We've travelled too far, and our momentum has taken over; we move idly towards eternity,
without possibility of reprieve or hope of explanation.
 ROS: Be happy-If you're not even happy what's so good about surviving? (He picks himself up.) We'll be all right.
I suppose we just go on.
 GUIL: Go where?
 ROS: To England.
 GUIL: England! That's a dead end. I never believed in it anyway.
 ROS: All we've got to do is make our report and that'll be that.
 Surely.
 GUIL: I don't believe it - A shore, a harbour, say - and we get off and we stop someone and say - Where's the
king?- And he says, oh, you follow that road there and take the first left and -( furiously). I don't believe any of it!
 ROS: It doesn't sound very plausible.
 GUIL: And even if we came face to face, what do we say?
 ROS: We say - We've arrived!
 GUIL (kingly): And who are you?
 ROS: We are Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.
 GUIL: Which is which?
 ROS: Well, I'm - You're -
 GUIL: What's it all about? -
 ROS: Well, we were bringing Hamlet - but then some pirates -
 GUIL: I don't begin to understand. Who are all these people, what's it got to do with me? You turn up out of the
blue with some cock and bull story
-
 ROS (with letter): We have a letter -
 GUIL (snatches it, opens it): A letter - yes - that's true. That's something... a letter... (reads). "As England
is Denmark's faithful tributary... as love between them like the palm might flourish, etcetera... that on the knowing
of this contents, without delay of any kind, should those bearers, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, put to sudden
death-"
 (He double takes. ROS snatches the letter. GUIL snatches it back. ROS snatches it halfback. They read it again
and look up.)
 (The PLAYER gets to his feet and walks over to his barrel and kicks it and shouts into it.)
 PLAYER: They've gone-It's all over!
 (One by one the players emerge, impossibly, from the barrel, and form a casually menacing circle round ROS
and GUIL who are still appalled and mesmerised.)
 GUIL (quietly): Where we went wrong was getting on a boat. We can move, of course, change direction, rattle
about, but our movement is contained within a larger one that carries us along as inexorably as the wind and
current...
 ROS: They had it in for us, didn't they? Right from the beginning. Who'd have thought that we were so
important?
 GUIL: But why? Was it all for this? Who are we that so much should converge on our little deaths? (In anguish
to the PLAYER.) Who are we?
 PLAYER: You are Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. That's enough.
 GUIL: No - it is not enough. To be told so little - to such an end - and still, finally, to be denied an explanation...
 PLAYER: In our experience, most things end in death.
 GUIL (fear, vengeance, scorn): Your experience?-Actors!
 (He snatches a dagger from the PLAYER's belt and holds the point at the
PLAYER's throat: the PLAYER backs and GUIL advances, speaking more quietly.)
 I'm talking about death-and you've never experienced that. And you cannot act it. You die a thousand casual
deaths-with none of that intensity which squeezes out life... and no blood runs cold anywhere. Because even as
you die you know that you will come back in a different hat. But no one gets up after death-there is no applausethere is only silence and some second-hand clothes, and that's - death -
 (And he pushes the blade in up to the hilt. The PLAYER stands with huge, terrible eyes, clutches at the wound
as the blade withdraws: he makes small weeping sounds and falls to his knees, and then right down:)
 (While he is dying, GUIL, nervous, high, almost hysterical, wheels on the TRAGEDIANS-) If we have a
destiny, then so had he - and if this is ours, then that was his - and if there are no explanations for us, then let
there be none for him -
 (The TRAGEDIANS watch the PLAYER die: they watch with some interest. The PLAYER finally lies still. A
short moment of silence. Then the tragedians start to applaud with genuine admiration. The PLAYER stands up,
brushing himself down.)
 PLAYER (modestly): Oh, come, come, gentlemen - no flattery - it was merely competent-
 (The tragedians are stilt congratulating him. The PLAYER approaches GUIL, who stands rooted, holding the
dagger.)
 What did you think? (Pause.) You see, it is the kind they do believe in - it's what is expected. (He holds his
hand out for the dagger. GUIL slowly puts the point of the dagger on to the PLAYER's hand, and pushes ... the
blade slides back into the handle. The PLAYER smiles, reclaims the dagger.)
 For a moment you thought I'd - cheated.
 (ROS relieves his own tension with loud nervy laughter.)
 ROS: Oh, very good! Very good! Took me in completely - didn't he take you in completely-(claps his hands.)
Encore! Encore!
 PLAYER (activated, arms spread, the professional): Deaths for all ages and occasions! Deaths by suspension,
convulsion, consumption, incision, execution, asphyxiation and malnutrition-! Climatic carnage, by poison and
by steel-! Double deaths by duel-! Show!
 (ALFRED, still in his queen's costume, dies by poison: the PLAYER, with rapier, kills the "KING" and duels with a
fourth TRAGEDIAN, inflicting and receiving a wound: the two remaining tragedians, the two "SPIES" dressed in
the same coats as ROS and GUIL, are stabbed, as before.)
 (And the light is fading over the deaths which take place right upstage.)
 (Dying amid the dying-tragically; romantically.) So there's an end to that-it's commonplace: light goes with life,
and in the winter of your years the dark comes early...
 GUIL (tired, drained, but stilt an edge of impatience; over the mime):
No... no... not for us, not like that. Dying is not romantic, and death is not a game which will soon be over... Death
is not anything ... death is not... It's the absence of presence, nothing more ... the endless time of never coming
back ... a gap you can't see, and when the wind blows through it, it makes no sound...
 (The light has gone upstage. Only GUIL and ROS are visible as ROS's; clapping falters to silence.)
 (Small pause.)
 ROS: That's it, then, is it?
 (No answer, he looks out front.)
 The sun's going down. Or the earth's coming up, as the fashionable theory has it.
 (Small pause.) Not that it makes any difference.
 (Pause.)
 What was it all about? When did it begin?
 (Pause, no answer.)
 Couldn't we just stay put? I mean no one is going to come on and drag us off.... They Ml just have to wait. We're
still young ... fit... we've got years...
 (Pause. No answer.)
 (A cry.) We've nothing wrong! We didn't harm anyone. Did we?
 GUIL: I can't remember.
 (ROS pulls himself together.)
 ROS: All right, then. I don't care. I've had enough. To tell you the truth, I'm relieved.
 (And he disappears from view.)
 (GUIL does not notice.)
 GUIL: Our names shouted in a certain dawn ... a message ... a summons... there must have been a
moment, at the beginning, where we could have said-no. But somehow we missed it.
 (He looks round and sees he is alone.)
 Rosen--?
 Guil--?
 (He gathers himself.)
 Well, we'll know better next time. Now you see me, now you -
 (And disappears.)
 (Immediately the whole stage is lit up, revealing, upstage, arranged in the approximate positions last held by the
dead TRAGEDIANS, the tableau of court and corpses which is the last scene of "Hamlet".)
 (That is: The KING, QUEEN, LAERTES and HAMLET all dead. HORATIO holds HAMLET. FORTINBRAS is
there.)
 (So are two AMBASSADORS from England.)
 AMBASSADORS: The signal is dismal;
 and our affairs from England come too late.
 The ears are senseless that should give us hearing to
 tell him his commandment is fulfilled, that
 Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
 Where should we have our thanks?
 HORATIO: Not from his mouth, had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their
death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, you from the Polack wars, and you from England, are here
arrived, give order that these bodies high on a stage be placed to the view; and let me speak to the yet unknowing
world how these things came about: so shall you hear of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts, of accidental
judgements, casual slaughters, of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, and, in this upshot, purposes mistook
fallen on the inventors' heads: all this can I truly deliver.
 (But during the above speech the play fades, overtaken by dark and music.)
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Here is an example of a syllogism. The cat has four paws.
Isidore and Fricot both have four paws. Therefore Isidore and Fricot are cats.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: My dog has got four paws.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Then it's a cat.
BERENGER [to Jean]: I've barely got the strength to go on living. Maybe I don't even want to.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician, after deep reflection]: So then logically speaking, my dog
must be a cat?
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Logically, yes. But the contrary is also true.
BERENGER [to Jean]: Solitude seems to oppress me. And so does the company of other
people.
JEAN [to Berenger]: You contradict yourself What oppresses you - solitude, or the company of
others? You consider yourself a thinker, yet you're devoid of logic.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: Logic is a very beautiful thing.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: As long as it is not abused.
BERENGER [to Jean]: Life is an abnormal business.
JEAN: On the contrary. Nothing could be more natural, and the proof is that people go On
living.
BERENGER: There are more dead people than living. And their numbers are increasing. The
living are getting rarer.
JEAN: The dead don't exist, there's no getting away from that! Ah! Ah ...! [He gives a huge
laugh.] Yet you're oppressed by them, too? How can you be oppressed by something that
doesn't exist?
BERENGER: I sometimes wonder if I exist myself JEAN: You don't exist, my dear Berenger,
because you don't think. Start thinking, then you will.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Another syllogism. All cats die. Socrates is dead. Therefore
Socrates is a cat.
OLD GENTLEMAN: And he's got four paws. That's true. I've got a cat named Socrates.
LOGICIAN: There you are, you see
JEAN [to Berenger]: Fundamentally you're just a bluffer. And a liar. You say that life doesn't
interest you. And yet there's somebody who does.
BERENGER: Who?
JEAN: Your little friend from the office who just went past. You're very fond of her!
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: So Socrates was a cat, was he?
LOGICIAN: Logic has just revealed the fact to us.
JEAN [to Berenger]: You didn't want her to see you in your present state. [BERENGER makes a
gesture.] That proves you're not indifferent to everything. But how can you expect Daisy to
be attracted to a drunkard?
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]. Let's get back to our cats.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: I'm all ears.
BERENGER [to Jean]: In any case, I think she's already got her eye on someone.
JEAN: Oh, who?
BERENGER: Dudard. An office colleague, qualified in law, with a big future in the firm - and
in Daisy's affections. I can't hope to compete with him.
LOGICIAN [to the old Gentleman]: The cat Isidore has four paws.
OLD GENTLEMAN: How do you know?
LOGICIAN: It's stated in the hypothesis.
BERENGER [to Jean]: The Chief thinks a lot of him. Whereas I've no future, I’ve no
qualifications. I don't stand a chance.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: Ah! In the hypothesis.
JEAN (to Berenger]: So you're giving up, just like that...?
BERENGER: What else can I do?
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Fricot also has four paws. So how many paws have Fricot
and Isidore?
OLD GENTLEMAN: Separately or together?
JEAN [to Berenger]: Life is a struggle, it's cowardly not to put up a fight!
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Separately or together, it all depends.
BERENGER [to Jean]: What can [do? I've nothing to put up a fight with.
JEAN: Then find yourself some weapons, my friend.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician after painful reflection]: Eight, eight paws.
LOGICIAN: Logic involves mental arithmetic, you see.
OLD GENTLEMAN: It certainly has many aspects!
BERENGER [to Jean]: Where can I find the weapons?
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: There are no limits to logic.
JEAN: Within yourself Through your own will.
BERENGER: What weapons?
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: I'm going to show you
JEAN [to Berenger]: The weapons of patience and culture, the weapons of the mind.
[BERENGER yawns.] Turn yourself into a keen and brilliant intellect. Get yourself up to the
mark!
BERENGER: How do I get myself up to the mark?
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman): If I take two paws away from these cats - how many does
each have left?
OLD GENTLEMAN: That's not so easy.
BERENGER [to Jean]: That's not so easy.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman): On the contrary, it's simple.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician): It may be simple for you, but not for me.
BERENGER [to Jean]: It may be simple for you, but not for me.
LOG I CIA N [to the Old Gentleman]: Come on, exercise your mind. Concentrate!
JEAN [to Berenger]: Come on, exercise your will. Concentrate I
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: I don't see how.
BERENGER [to Jean]: I really don't see how.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman): You have to be told every-thing.
JEAN [to Berenger]: You have to be told everything.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman): Take a sheet of paper and calculate. If you take six paws 
from the two cats, how many paws are left to each cat?
OLD GENTLEMAN: Just a moment ... [He calculates on a sheet of paper which he takes from
his pocket.]
JEAN: This is what you must do: dress yourself properly, shave every day, put on a clean shirt.
BERENGER: The laundry's so expensive
JEAN: Cut down on your drinking. This is the way to come out: wear a hat, a tie like this, a wellcut suit, shoes well polished. [As he mentions the various items of clothing he points selfcontentedly to his own hat, tie, and shoes.)
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: There are several possible solutions.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Tell me.
BERENGER [to Jean]: Then what do I do? Tell me
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: I'm listening.
BERENGER [to Jean]: I'm listening.
JEAN: You're a timid creature, but not without talent
BERENGER: I've got talent, me?
JEAN: So use it. Put yourself in the picture. Keep abreast of the cultural and literary events of
the times.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician): One possibility is: one cat could have four paws and the
other two.
BERENGER [to Jean]: I get so little spare time!
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: You're not without talent You just needed to exercise it.
JEAN: Take advantage of what free time you do have. Don't just let yourself drift.
OLD GENTLEMAN: I've never had the time. I was an official you know.
LOGICIAN: One can always find time to learn.
JEAN [to Berenger]: One can always find time.
BERENGER [to Jean]: It's too late now.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: It's a bit late in the day for me.
JEAN [to Berenger]: It's never too late.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: It's never too late.
JEAN [to Berenger]: You work eight hours a day, like me and everybody else, but not on
Sundays, nor in the evening, nor for three weeks in the summer. That's quite sufficient, with a
little method.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Well, what about the other solutions? Use a little method, a
little method!
[The OLD GENTLEMAN starts to calculate anew.]
JEAN [to Berenger]: Look, instead of drinking and feeling sick, isn't it better to be fresh and
eager, even at work? And you can spend your free time constructively.
BERENGER: How do you mean?
JEAN: By visiting museums, reading literary periodicals, going to lectures. That'll solve your
troubles, it will develop your mind. In four weeks you'll be a cultured man.
BERENGER: You're right.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: There could be one cat with five paws...
JEAN [to Berenger]: You see, you even think so yourself!
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: And one cat with one paw. But would they still be cats,
then?
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Why not?
JEAN [to Berenger]: Instead of squandering all your spare money on drink, isn't it better to buy
a ticket for an interesting play? Do you know anything about the avant-garde theatre there's so
much talk about? Have you seen Ionesco's plays?
BERENGER [to Jean]: Unfortunately, no. I've only heard people talk about them.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: By taking two of the eight paws away from the two cats
JEAN [to Berenger]: There's one playing now. Take advantage of it.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: ... we could have one cat with six paws
BERENGER: It would be an excellent initiation into the artistic life of our times.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: We could have one cat with no paws at all.
BERENGER: You're right, perfectly right. I'm going to put myself into the picture, like you said.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: In that case, one cat would be specially privileged.
BERENGER [to Jean]: I will, I promise you.
JEAN: You promise yourself, that's the main thing.
OLD GENTLEMAN: And one under-privileged cat deprived of all paws.
BERENGER: I make myself a solemn promise, I'll keep my word to myself
LOGICIAN: That would be unjust, and therefore not logical.
BERENGER: Instead of drinking, I'll develop my mind. I feel better already. My head already
feels clearer.
JEAN: You see!
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: Not logical?
BERENGER: This afternoon I'll go to the museum. And I’ll book two seats for the theatre this
evening. Will you come with me?
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Because Logic means Justice.
JEAN [to Berenger]: You must persevere. Keep up your good resolutions.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: I get it. Justice
BERENGER [to Jean]: I promise you, and I promise myself. Will you come to the museum with
me this afternoon?
JEAN [to Berenger]:I have to take a rest this afternoon; it's in my programme for the day.
OLD GENTLEMAN: Justice is one more aspect of Logic.
BERENGER [to Jean]: But you will come with me to the theatre this evening?
JEAN: No, not this evening.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: Your mind is getting clearer!
JEAN [to Berenger]: I sincerely hope you'll keep up your good resolutions. But this evening I
have to meet some friends for a drink.
BERENGER: For a drink?
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: What's more, a cat with no paws at all
JEAN [to Berenger]: I've promised to go. I always keep my word.
OLD GENTLEMAN [to the Logician]: ... wouldn't be able to run fast enough to catch mice.
BERENGER [to Jean]: Ah, now it's you that's setting me a bad example! You're going out
drinking.
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman]: You're already making progress in logic.
[A sound of rapid galloping is heard approaching again, trumpeting and the sound of
rhinoceros hooves and pantings; this time the sound comes from the opposite direction
approaching from back-stage to front, in the left wings.]
JEAN [furiously to Berenger]: It's not a habit with me, you know. It's not the same as with you.
With you ... you're … it's not the same thing at all
BERENGER: Why isn't it the same thing?
JEAN [shouting over the noise coming from the cafe']: I'm no drunkard, not me!
LOGICIAN [shouting to the Old Gentleman]: Even with no paws a cat must catch mice. That's
in its nature.
BERENGER [shouting very loudly]: I didn't mean you were a drunkard. But why would it make
me one any more than you, in a case like that?
OLD GENTLEMAN [shouting to the Logician]: What's in the cat's nature?
JEAN [to Berenger]: Because there's moderation in all things. I'm a moderate person, not like
you!
LOGICIAN [to the Old Gentleman, cupping his hands to his ears]: What did you say?
[Deafening sounds drown the words of the four characters. I
BERENGER [to Jean, cupping his hands to his ear;]: What about me, what? What did you say?
JEAN [roaring]: I said that
OLD GENTLEMAN [roaring]: I said that
JEAN [suddenly aware of the noises which are now very near]: Whatever's happening?
LOGICIAN: What is going on?
JEAN [rises, knocking his chair over as he does so; looks towards left wings where the noises of
the passing rhinoceros are coming from]:Oh, a rhinoceros!
LOGICIAN [rising, knocking over his chair]: Oh, a rhinoceros!
OLD GENTLEMAN [doing the same): Oh, a rhinoceros!
BERENGER (still seated, but this time, taking more notice]: Rhinoceros! In the opposite
direction!
WAITRESS (emerging with a tray and glasses]: What is it? Oh, a rhinoceros! [She drops the
tray, breaking the glasses.]
PROPRIETOR [Coming out of the cafe']: What's going on?
WAITRESS (to the Proprietor]: A rhinoceros!
LOGICIAN: A rhinoceros, going full-tilt on the opposite pavement!
GROCER [Coming out of his shop]: Oh, a rhinoceros!
JEAN; Oh, a rhinoceros!
GROCER'S WIFE [sticking her head through the upstairs window of shop]: Oh, a rhinoceros!
PROPRIETOR: It's no reason to break the glasses.
JEAN: It's rushing straight ahead, brushing up against the shop windows.
DAISY [entering left]: Oh, a rhinoceros!
BERENGER [noticing Daisy]: Oh, Daisy!
[noise of people fleeing, the same 'Ohs' and 'Ahs' as before)
WAITRESS: Well of all things!
PROPRIETOR [to the waitress]: You'll be charged up for those!
BERENGER tries to make himself scarce, not to be seen by Daisy. The OLD
GENTLEMAN, the LOGICIAN, the GROCER, and iris WIFE move to centre-stage and say
together]
ALL: Well, of all things!
JEAN and BERENGER: Well, of all things!
(A piteous mewing is heard, then an equally piteous cry of a woman.]
ALL: Oh!
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
Waiting for Godot
tragicomedy in 2 acts
By
Samuel Beckett
Estragon
Vladimir
Lucky
Pozzo
a boy
ACT I
Act 2
Back to Samuel Beckett Resources
A country road. A tree.
Evening.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
Estragon, sitting on a low mound, is trying to take off his boot. He pulls at it with both hands,
panting. #
 Image from timil.com
He gives up, exhausted, rests, tries again.
As before.
Enter Vladimir.
ESTRAGON:
(giving up again). Nothing to be done.
VLADIMIR:
(advancing with short, stiff strides, legs wide apart). I'm beginning to come round to that
opinion. All my life I've tried to put it from me, saying Vladimir, be reasonable, you haven't
yet tried everything. And I resumed the struggle. (He broods, musing on the struggle. Turning
to Estragon.) So there you are again.
ESTRAGON:
Am I?
VLADIMIR:
I'm glad to see you back. I thought you were gone forever.
ESTRAGON:
Me too.
VLADIMIR:
Together again at last! We'll have to celebrate this. But how? (He reflects.) Get up till I
embrace you.
ESTRAGON:
(irritably). Not now, not now.
VLADIMIR:
(hurt, coldly). May one inquire where His Highness spent the night?
ESTRAGON:
In a ditch.
VLADIMIR:
(admiringly). A ditch! Where?
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
(without gesture). Over there.
VLADIMIR:
And they didn't beat you?
ESTRAGON:
Beat me? Certainly they beat me.
VLADIMIR:
The same lot as usual?
ESTRAGON:
The same? I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
When I think of it . . . all these years . . . but for me . . . where would you be . . . (Decisively.)
You'd be nothing more than a little heap of bones at the present minute, no doubt about it.
ESTRAGON:
And what of it?
VLADIMIR:
(gloomily). It's too much for one man. (Pause. Cheerfully.) On the other hand what's the good
of losing heart now, that's what I say. We should have thought of it a million years ago, in the
nineties.
ESTRAGON:
Ah stop blathering and help me off with this bloody thing.
VLADIMIR:
Hand in hand from the top of the Eiffel Tower, among the first. We were respectable in those
days. Now it's too late. They wouldn't even let us up. (Estragon tears at his boot.) What are
you doing?
ESTRAGON:
Taking off my boot. Did that never happen to you?
VLADIMIR:
Boots must be taken off every day, I'm tired telling you that. Why don't you listen to me?
ESTRAGON:
(feebly). Help me!
VLADIMIR:
It hurts?
ESTRAGON:
(angrily). Hurts! He wants to know if it hurts!
VLADIMIR:
(angrily). No one ever suffers but you. I don't count. I'd like to hear what you'd say if you had
what I have.
ESTRAGON:
It hurts?
VLADIMIR:
(angrily). Hurts! He wants to know if it hurts!
ESTRAGON:
(pointing). You might button it all the same.
VLADIMIR:
(stooping). True. (He buttons his fly.) Never neglect the little things of life.
ESTRAGON:
What do you expect, you always wait till the last moment.
VLADIMIR:
(musingly). The last moment . . . (He meditates.) Hope deferred maketh the something sick,
who said that?
ESTRAGON:
Why don't you help me?
VLADIMIR:
Sometimes I feel it coming all the same. Then I go all queer. (He takes off his hat, peers inside
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
it, feels about inside it, shakes it, puts it on again.) How shall I say? Relieved and at the same
time . . . (he searches for the word) . . . appalled. (With emphasis.) AP-PALLED. (He takes
off his hat again, peers inside it.) Funny. (He knocks on the crown as though to dislodge a
foreign body, peers into it again, puts it on again.) Nothing to be done. (Estragon with a
supreme effort succeeds in pulling off his boot. He peers inside it, feels about inside it, turns it
upside down, shakes it, looks on the ground to see if anything has fallen out, finds nothing,
feels inside it again, staring sightlessly before him.) Well?
ESTRAGON:
Nothing.
VLADIMIR:
Show me.
ESTRAGON:
There's nothing to show.
VLADIMIR:
Try and put it on again.
ESTRAGON:
(examining his foot). I'll air it for a bit.
VLADIMIR:
There's man all over for you, blaming on his boots the faults of his feet. (He takes off his hat
again, peers inside it, feels about inside it, knocks on the crown, blows into it, puts it on
again.) This is getting alarming. (Silence. Vladimir deep in thought, Estragon pulling at his
toes.) One of the thieves was saved. (Pause.) It's a reasonable percentage. (Pause.) Gogo.
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
Suppose we repented.
ESTRAGON:
Repented what?
VLADIMIR:
Oh . . . (He reflects.) We wouldn't have to go into the details.
ESTRAGON:
Our being born?
Vladimir breaks into a hearty laugh which he immediately stifles, his hand pressed to his
pubis, his face contorted.
VLADIMIR:
One daren't even laugh any more.
ESTRAGON:
Dreadful privation.
VLADIMIR:
Merely smile. (He smiles suddenly from ear to ear, keeps smiling, ceases as suddenly.) It's not
the same thing. Nothing to be done. (Pause.) Gogo.
ESTRAGON:
(irritably). What is it?
VLADIMIR:
Did you ever read the Bible?
ESTRAGON:
The Bible . . . (He reflects.) I must have taken a look at it.
VLADIMIR:
Do you remember the Gospels?
ESTRAGON:
I remember the maps of the Holy Land. Coloured they were. Very pretty. The Dead Sea was
pale blue. The very look of it made me thirsty. That's where we'll go, I used to say, that's
where we'll go for our honeymoon. We'll swim. We'll be happy.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
You should have been a poet.
ESTRAGON:
I was. (Gesture towards his rags.) Isn't that obvious?
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Where was I . . . How's your foot?
ESTRAGON:
Swelling visibly.
VLADIMIR:
Ah yes, the two thieves. Do you remember the story?
ESTRAGON:
No.
VLADIMIR:
Shall I tell it to you?
ESTRAGON:
No.
VLADIMIR:
It'll pass the time. (Pause.) Two thieves, crucified at the same time as our Saviour. One—
ESTRAGON:
Our what?
VLADIMIR:
Our Saviour. Two thieves. One is supposed to have been saved and the other . . . (he searches
for the contrary of saved) . . . damned.
ESTRAGON:
Saved from what?
VLADIMIR:
Hell.
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
He does not move.
VLADIMIR:
And yet . . . (pause) . . . how is it –this is not boring you I hope– how is it that of the four
Evangelists only one speaks of a thief being saved. The four of them were there –or
thereabouts– and only one speaks of a thief being saved. (Pause.) Come on, Gogo, return the
ball, can't you, once in a way?
ESTRAGON:
(with exaggerated enthusiasm). I find this really most extraordinarily interesting.
VLADIMIR:
One out of four. Of the other three, two don't mention any thieves at all and the third says that
both of them abused him.
ESTRAGON:
Who?
VLADIMIR:
What?
ESTRAGON:
What's all this about? Abused who?
VLADIMIR:
The Saviour.
ESTRAGON:
Why?
VLADIMIR:
Because he wouldn't save them.
ESTRAGON:
From hell?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
VLADIMIR:
Imbecile! From death.
ESTRAGON:
I thought you said hell.
VLADIMIR:
From death, from death.
ESTRAGON:
Well what of it?
VLADIMIR:
Then the two of them must have been damned.
ESTRAGON:
And why not?
VLADIMIR:
But one of the four says that one of the two was saved.
ESTRAGON:
Well? They don't agree and that's all there is to it.
VLADIMIR:
But all four were there. And only one speaks of a thief being saved. Why believe him rather
than the others?
ESTRAGON:
Who believes him?
VLADIMIR:
Everybody. It's the only version they know.
ESTRAGON:
People are bloody ignorant apes.
He rises painfully, goes limping to extreme left, halts, gazes into distance off with his hand
screening his eyes, turns, goes to extreme right, gazes into distance. Vladimir watches him,
then goes and picks up the boot, peers into it, drops it hastily.
VLADIMIR:
Pah!
He spits. Estragon moves to center, halts with his back to auditorium.
ESTRAGON:
Charming spot. (He turns, advances to front, halts facing auditorium.) Inspiring prospects.
(He turns to Vladimir.) Let's go.
VLADIMIR:
We can't.
ESTRAGON:
Why not?
VLADIMIR:
We're waiting for Godot.
ESTRAGON:
(despairingly). Ah! (Pause.) You're sure it was here?
VLADIMIR:
What?
ESTRAGON:
That we were to wait.
VLADIMIR:
He said by the tree. (They look at the tree.) Do you see any others?
ESTRAGON:
What is it?
VLADIMIR:
I don't know. A willow.
ESTRAGON:
Where are the leaves?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
VLADIMIR:
 It must be dead.
ESTRAGON:
No more weeping.
VLADIMIR:
Or perhaps it's not the season.
ESTRAGON:
Looks to me more like a bush.
VLADIMIR:
A shrub.
ESTRAGON:
A bush.
VLADIMIR:
A—. What are you insinuating? That we've come to the wrong place?
ESTRAGON:
He should be here.
VLADIMIR:
He didn't say for sure he'd come.
ESTRAGON:
And if he doesn't come?
VLADIMIR:
We'll come back tomorrow.
ESTRAGON:
And then the day after tomorrow.
VLADIMIR:
Possibly.
ESTRAGON:
And so on.
VLADIMIR:
The point is—
ESTRAGON:
Until he comes.
VLADIMIR:
You're merciless.
ESTRAGON:
We came here yesterday.
VLADIMIR:
Ah no, there you're mistaken.
ESTRAGON:
What did we do yesterday?
VLADIMIR:
What did we do yesterday?
ESTRAGON:
Yes.
VLADIMIR:
Why . . . (Angrily.) Nothing is certain when you're about.
ESTRAGON:
In my opinion we were here.
VLADIMIR:
(looking round). You recognize the place?
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
I didn't say that.
VLADIMIR:
Well?
ESTRAGON:
That makes no difference.
VLADIMIR:
All the same . . . that tree . . . (turning towards auditorium) that bog . . .
ESTRAGON:
You're sure it was this evening?
VLADIMIR:
What?
ESTRAGON:
That we were to wait.
VLADIMIR:
He said Saturday. (Pause.) I think.
ESTRAGON:
You think.
VLADIMIR:
I must have made a note of it. (He fumbles in his pockets, bursting with miscellaneous
rubbish.)
ESTRAGON:
(very insidious). But what Saturday? And is it Saturday? Is it not rather Sunday? (Pause.) Or
Monday? (Pause.) Or Friday?
VLADIMIR:
(looking wildly about him, as though the date was inscribed in the landscape). It's not
possible!
ESTRAGON:
Or Thursday?
VLADIMIR:
What'll we do?
ESTRAGON:
If he came yesterday and we weren't here you may be sure he won't come again today.
VLADIMIR:
But you say we were here yesterday.
ESTRAGON:
I may be mistaken. (Pause.) Let's stop talking for a minute, do you mind?
VLADIMIR:
(feebly). All right. (Estragon sits down on the mound. Vladimir paces agitatedly to and fro,
halting from time to time to gaze into distance off. Estragon falls asleep. Vladimir halts finally
before Estragon.) Gogo! . . . Gogo! . . . GOGO!
Estragon wakes with a start.
ESTRAGON:
(restored to the horror of his situation). I was asleep! (Despairingly.) Why will you never let
me sleep?
VLADIMIR:
I felt lonely.
ESTRAGON:
I had a dream.
VLADIMIR:
Don't tell me!
ESTRAGON:
I dreamt that—
VLADIMIR:
DON'T TELL ME!
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
ESTRAGON:
(gesture toward the universe). This one is enough for you? (Silence.) It's not nice of you,
Didi. Who am I to tell my private nightmares to if I can't tell them to you?
VLADIMIR:
Let them remain private. You know I can't bear that.
ESTRAGON:
(coldly.) There are times when I wonder if it wouldn't be better for us to part.
VLADIMIR:
You wouldn't go far.
ESTRAGON:
That would be too bad, really too bad. (Pause.) Wouldn't it, Didi, be really too bad? (Pause.)
When you think of the beauty of the way. (Pause.) And the goodness of the wayfarers.
(Pause. Wheedling.) Wouldn't it, Didi?
VLADIMIR:
Calm yourself.
ESTRAGON:
(voluptuously.) Calm . . . calm . . . The English say cawm. (Pause.) You know the story of the
Englishman in the brothel?
VLADIMIR:
Yes.
ESTRAGON:
Tell it to me.
VLADIMIR:
Ah stop it!
ESTRAGON:
An Englishman having drunk a little more than usual proceeds to a brothel. The bawd asks
him if he wants a fair one, a dark one or a red-haired one. Go on.
VLADIMIR:
STOP IT!
Exit Vladimir hurriedly. Estragon gets up and follows him as far as the limit of the stage.
Gestures of Estragon like those of a spectator encouraging a pugilist. Enter Vladimir. He
brushes past Estragon, crosses the stage with bowed head. Estragon takes a step towards him,
halts.
ESTRAGON:
(gently.) You wanted to speak to me? (Silence. Estragon takes a step forward.) You had
something to say to me? (Silence. Another step forward.) Didi . . .
VLADIMIR:
(without turning). I've nothing to say to you.
ESTRAGON:
(step forward). You're angry? (Silence. Step forward). Forgive me. (Silence. Step forward.
Estragon lays his hand on Vladimir's shoulder.) Come, Didi. (Silence.) Give me your hand.
(Vladimir half turns.) Embrace me! (Vladimir stiffens.) Don't be stubborn! (Vladimir softens.
They embrace. #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
Estragon recoils.) You stink of garlic!
VLADIMIR:
It's for the kidneys. (Silence. Estragon looks attentively at the tree.) What do we do now?
ESTRAGON:
Wait.
VLADIMIR:
Yes, but while waiting.
ESTRAGON:
What about hanging ourselves?
VLADIMIR:
Hmm. It'd give us an erection.
ESTRAGON:
(highly excited). An erection!
VLADIMIR:
With all that follows. Where it falls mandrakes grow. That's why they shriek when you pull
them up. Did you not know that?
ESTRAGON:
Let's hang ourselves immediately!
VLADIMIR:
From a bough? (They go towards the tree.) I wouldn't trust it.
ESTRAGON:
We can always try.
VLADIMIR:
Go ahead.
ESTRAGON:
After you.
VLADIMIR:
No no, you first.
ESTRAGON:
Why me?
VLADIMIR:
You're lighter than I am.
ESTRAGON:
Just so!
VLADIMIR:
I don't understand.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
ESTRAGON:
Use your intelligence, can't you?
Vladimir uses his intelligence.
VLADIMIR:
(finally). I remain in the dark.
ESTRAGON:
This is how it is. (He reflects.) The bough . . . the bough . . . (Angrily.) Use your head, can't
you?
VLADIMIR:
You're my only hope.
ESTRAGON:
(with effort). Gogo light—bough not break—Gogo dead. Didi heavy—bough break—Didi
alone. Whereas—
VLADIMIR:
I hadn't thought of that.
ESTRAGON:
If it hangs you it'll hang anything.
VLADIMIR:
But am I heavier than you?
ESTRAGON:
So you tell me. I don't know. There's an even chance. Or nearly.
VLADIMIR:
Well? What do we do?
ESTRAGON:
Don't let's do anything. It's safer.
VLADIMIR:
Let's wait and see what he says.
ESTRAGON:
Who?
VLADIMIR:
Godot.
ESTRAGON:
Good idea.
VLADIMIR:
Let's wait till we know exactly how we stand.
ESTRAGON:
On the other hand it might be better to strike the iron before it freezes.
VLADIMIR:
I'm curious to hear what he has to offer. Then we'll take it or leave it.
ESTRAGON:
What exactly did we ask him for?
VLADIMIR:
Were you not there?
ESTRAGON:
I can't have been listening.
VLADIMIR:
Oh . . . Nothing very definite.
ESTRAGON:
A kind of prayer.
VLADIMIR:
Precisely.
ESTRAGON:
A vague supplication.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
Exactly.
ESTRAGON:
And what did he reply?
VLADIMIR:
That he'd see.
ESTRAGON:
That he couldn't promise anything.
VLADIMIR:
That he'd have to think it over.
ESTRAGON:
In the quiet of his home.
VLADIMIR:
Consult his family.
ESTRAGON:
His friends.
VLADIMIR:
His agents.
ESTRAGON:
His correspondents.
VLADIMIR:
His books.
ESTRAGON:
His bank account.
VLADIMIR:
Before taking a decision.
ESTRAGON:
It's the normal thing.
VLADIMIR:
Is it not?
ESTRAGON:
I think it is.
VLADIMIR:
I think so too.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
(anxious). And we?
VLADIMIR:
I beg your pardon?
ESTRAGON:
I said, And we?
VLADIMIR:
I don't understand.
ESTRAGON:
Where do we come in?
VLADIMIR:
Come in?
ESTRAGON:
Take your time.
VLADIMIR:
Come in? On our hands and knees.
ESTRAGON:
As bad as that?
VLADIMIR:
Your Worship wishes to assert his prerogatives?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
ESTRAGON:
We've no rights any more?
Laugh of Vladimir, stifled as before, less the smile.
VLADIMIR:
You'd make me laugh if it wasn't prohibited.
ESTRAGON:
We've lost our rights?
VLADIMIR:
(distinctly). We got rid of them.
Silence. They remain motionless, arms dangling, heads sunk, sagging at the knees.
ESTRAGON:
(feebly). We're not tied? (Pause.) We're not—
VLADIMIR:
Listen!
They listen, grotesquely rigid. #
ESTRAGON:
I hear nothing.
VLADIMIR:
Hsst! (They listen. Estragon loses his balance, almost falls. He clutches the arm of Vladimir,
who totters. They listen, huddled together.) Nor I.
Sighs of relief. They relax and separate.
ESTRAGON:
You gave me a fright.
VLADIMIR:
I thought it was he.
ESTRAGON:
Who?
VLADIMIR:
Godot.
ESTRAGON:
Pah! The wind in the reeds.
VLADIMIR:
I could have sworn I heard shouts.
ESTRAGON:
And why would he shout?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
VLADIMIR:
At his horse.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
(violently). I'm hungry!
VLADIMIR:
Do you want a carrot?
ESTRAGON:
Is that all there is?
VLADIMIR:
I might have some turnips.
ESTRAGON:
Give me a carrot. (Vladimir rummages in his pockets, takes out a turnip and gives it to
Estragon who takes a bite out of it. Angrily.) It's a turnip!
VLADIMIR:
Oh pardon! I could have sworn it was a carrot. (He rummages again in his pockets, finds
nothing but turnips.) All that's turnips. (He rummages.) You must have eaten the last. (He
rummages.) Wait, I have it. (He brings out a carrot and gives it to Estragon.) There, dear
fellow. #
(Estragon wipes the carrot on his sleeve and begins to eat it.) Make it last, that's the end of
them.
ESTRAGON:
(chewing). I asked you a question.
VLADIMIR:
Ah.
ESTRAGON:
Did you reply?
VLADIMIR:
How's the carrot?
ESTRAGON:
It's a carrot.
VLADIMIR:
So much the better, so much the better. (Pause.) What was it you wanted to know?
ESTRAGON:
I've forgotten. (Chews.) That's what annoys me. (He looks at the carrot appreciatively,
dangles it between finger and thumb.) I'll never forget this carrot. (He sucks the end of it
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
meditatively.) Ah yes, now I remember.
VLADIMIR:
Well?
ESTRAGON:
(his mouth full, vacuously). We're not tied?
VLADIMIR:
I don't hear a word you're saying.
ESTRAGON:
(chews, swallows). I'm asking you if we're tied.
VLADIMIR:
Tied?
ESTRAGON:
Ti-ed.
VLADIMIR:
How do you mean tied?
ESTRAGON:
Down.
VLADIMIR:
But to whom? By whom?
ESTRAGON:
To your man.
VLADIMIR:
To Godot? Tied to Godot! What an idea! No question of it. (Pause.) For the moment.
ESTRAGON:
His name is Godot?
VLADIMIR:
I think so.
ESTRAGON:
Fancy that. (He raises what remains of the carrot by the stub of leaf, twirls it before his eyes.)
Funny, the more you eat the worse it gets.
VLADIMIR:
With me it's just the opposite.
ESTRAGON:
In other words?
VLADIMIR:
I get used to the muck as I go along.
ESTRAGON:
(after prolonged reflection). Is that the opposite?
VLADIMIR:
Question of temperament.
ESTRAGON:
Of character.
VLADIMIR:
Nothing you can do about it.
ESTRAGON:
No use struggling.
VLADIMIR:
One is what one is.
ESTRAGON:
No use wriggling.
VLADIMIR:
The essential doesn't change.
ESTRAGON:
Nothing to be done. (He proffers the remains of the carrot to Vladimir.) Like to finish it?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
A terrible cry, close at hand. Estragon drops the carrot. They remain motionless, then
together make a sudden rush towards the wings. Estragon stops halfway, runs back, picks up
the carrot, stuffs it in his pocket, runs to rejoin Vladimir who is waiting for him, stops again,
runs back, picks up his boot, runs to rejoin Vladimir. Huddled together, shoulders hunched,
cringing away from the menace, they wait. #
Enter Pozzo and Lucky. Pozzo drives Lucky by means of a rope passed round his neck, so that
Lucky is the first to enter, followed by the rope which is long enough to let him reach the
middle of the stage before Pozzo appears. Lucky carries a heavy bag, a folding stool, a picnic
basket and a greatcoat, Pozzo a whip.
POZZO:
(off). On! (Crack of whip. Pozzo appears. They cross the stage. Lucky passes before Vladimir
and Estragon and exit. Pozzo at the sight of Vladimir and Estragon stops short. The rope
tautens. Pozzo jerks at it violently.) Back!
Noise of Lucky falling with all his baggage. Vladimir and Estragon turn towards him, half
wishing half fearing to go to his assistance. Vladimir takes a step towards Lucky, Estragon
holds him back by the sleeve.
VLADIMIR:
Let me go!
ESTRAGON:
Stay where you are!
POZZO:
Be careful! He's wicked. (Vladimir and Estragon turn towards Pozzo.) With strangers.
ESTRAGON:
(undertone). Is that him?
VLADIMIR:
Who?
ESTRAGON:
(trying to remember the name). Er . . .
VLADIMIR:
Godot?
ESTRAGON:
Yes.
POZZO:
I present myself: Pozzo.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
(to Estragon). Not at all!
ESTRAGON:
He said Godot.
VLADIMIR:
Not at all!
ESTRAGON:
(timidly, to Pozzo). You're not Mr. Godot, Sir?
POZZO:
(terrifying voice). I am Pozzo! (Silence.) Pozzo! (Silence.) Does that name mean nothing to
you? (Silence.) I say does that name mean nothing to you?
Vladimir and Estragon look at each other questioningly.
ESTRAGON:
(pretending to search). Bozzo . . . Bozzo . . .
VLADIMIR:
(ditto). Pozzo . . . Pozzo . . .
POZZO:
PPPOZZZO!
ESTRAGON:
Ah! Pozzo . . . let me see . . . Pozzo . . .
VLADIMIR:
Is it Pozzo or Bozzo?
ESTRAGON:
Pozzo . . . no . . . I'm afraid I . . . no . . . I don't seem to . . .
Pozzo advances threateningly.
VLADIMIR:
(conciliating). I once knew a family called Gozzo. The mother had the clap.
ESTRAGON:
(hastily). We're not from these parts, Sir.
POZZO:
(halting). You are human beings none the less. (He puts on his glasses.) As far as one can
see. (He takes off his glasses.) Of the same species as myself. (He bursts into an enormous
laugh.) Of the same species as Pozzo! Made in God's image!
VLADIMIR:
Well you see—
POZZO:
(peremptory). Who is Godot?
ESTRAGON:
Godot?
POZZO:
You took me for Godot.
VLADIMIR:
Oh no, Sir, not for an instant, Sir.
POZZO:
Who is he?
VLADIMIR:
Oh he's a . . . he's a kind of acquaintance.
ESTRAGON:
Nothing of the kind, we hardly know him.
VLADIMIR:
True . . . we don't know him very well . . . but all the same . . .
ESTRAGON:
Personally, I wouldn't even know him if I saw him.
POZZO:
You took me for him.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
ESTRAGON:
(recoiling before Pozzo). That's to say . . . you understand . . . the dusk . . . the strain . . .
waiting . . . I confess . . . I imagined . . . for a second . . .
POZZO:
Waiting? So you were waiting for him?
VLADIMIR:
Well you see—
POZZO:
Here? On my land?
VLADIMIR:
We didn't intend any harm.
ESTRAGON:
We meant well.
POZZO:
The road is free to all.
VLADIMIR:
That's how we looked at it.
POZZO:
It's a disgrace. But there you are.
ESTRAGON:
Nothing we can do about it.
POZZO:
(with magnanimous gesture). Let's say no more about it. (He jerks the rope.) Up pig! (Pause.)
Every time he drops he falls asleep. (Jerks the rope.) Up hog! (Noise of Lucky getting up and
picking up his baggage. Pozzo jerks the rope.) Back! (Enter Lucky backwards.) Stop! (Lucky
stops.) Turn! (Lucky turns. To Vladimir and Estragon, affably.) Gentlemen, I am happy to
have met you. (Before their incredulous expression.) Yes yes, sincerely happy. (He jerks the
rope.) Closer! (Lucky advances.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Yes, the road seems long when one
journeys all alone for . . . (he consults his watch) . . . yes . . . (he calculates) . . . yes, six hours,
that's right, six hours on end, and never a soul in sight. (To Lucky.) Coat! (Lucky puts down
the bag, advances, gives the coat, goes back to his place, takes up the bag.) Hold that! (Pozzo
holds out the whip. Lucky advances and, both his hands being occupied, takes the whip in his
mouth, then goes back to his place. Pozzo begins to put on his coat, stops.) Coat! (Lucky puts
down the bag, basket and stool, helps Pozzo on with his coat, goes back to his place and takes
up bag, basket and stool.) Touch of autumn in the air this evening. (Pozzo finishes buttoning
up his coat, stoops, inspects himself, straightens up.) Whip! (Lucky advances, stoops, Pozzo
snatches the whip from his mouth, Lucky goes back to his place.) Yes, gentlemen, I cannot go
for long without the society of my likes (he puts on his glasses and looks at the two likes)
even when the likeness is an imperfect one. (He takes off his glasses.) Stool! (Lucky puts
down bag and basket, advances, opens stool, puts it down, goes back to his place, takes up
bag and basket.) Closer! (Lucky puts down bag and basket, advances, moves stool, goes back
to his place, takes up bag and basket. Pozzo sits down, places the butt of his whip against
Lucky's chest and pushes.) Back! (Lucky takes a step back.) Further! (Lucky takes another
step back.) Stop! (Lucky stops. To Vladimir and Estragon.) That is why, with your
permission, I propose to dally with you a moment, before I venture any further. Basket!
(Lucky advances, gives the basket, goes back to his place.) The fresh air stimulates the jaded
appetite. (He opens the basket, takes out a piece of chicken and a bottle of wine.) Basket!
(Lucky advances, picks up the basket and goes back to his place.) Further! (Lucky takes a step
back.) He stinks. Happy days!
He drinks from the bottle, puts it down and begins to eat. Silence. #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
Vladimir and Estragon, cautiously at first, then more boldly, begin to circle about Lucky,
inspecting him up and down. Pozzo eats his chicken voraciously, throwing away the bones
after having sucked them. Lucky sags slowly, until bag and basket touch the ground, then
straightens up with a start and begins to sag again. Rhythm of one sleeping on his feet.
ESTRAGON:
What ails him?
VLADIMIR:
He looks tired.
ESTRAGON:
Why doesn't he put down his bags?
VLADIMIR:
How do I know? (They close in on him.) Careful!
ESTRAGON:
Say something to him.
VLADIMIR:
Look!
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
(pointing). His neck!
ESTRAGON:
(looking at the neck). I see nothing.
VLADIMIR:
Here.
Estragon goes over beside Vladimir.
ESTRAGON:
Oh I say!
VLADIMIR:
A running sore!
ESTRAGON:
It's the rope.
VLADIMIR:
It's the rubbing.
ESTRAGON:
It's inevitable.
VLADIMIR:
It's the knot.
ESTRAGON:
It's the chafing.
They resume their inspection, dwell on the face.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
VLADIMIR:
(grudgingly). He's not bad looking.
ESTRAGON:
(shrugging his shoulders, wry face.) Would you say so?
VLADIMIR:
A trifle effeminate.
ESTRAGON:
Look at the slobber.
VLADIMIR:
It's inevitable.
ESTRAGON:
Look at the slaver.
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps he's a halfwit.
ESTRAGON:
A cretin.
VLADIMIR:
(looking closer). Looks like a goiter.
ESTRAGON:
(ditto). It's not certain.
VLADIMIR:
He's panting.
ESTRAGON:
It's inevitable.
VLADIMIR:
And his eyes!
ESTRAGON:
What about them?
VLADIMIR:
Goggling out of his head. #
ESTRAGON:
Looks like his last gasp to me.
VLADIMIR:
It's not certain. (Pause.) Ask him a question.
ESTRAGON:
Would that be a good thing?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
VLADIMIR:
What do we risk?
ESTRAGON:
(timidly). Mister . . .
VLADIMIR:
Louder.
ESTRAGON:
(louder). Mister . . .
POZZO:
Leave him in peace! (They turn toward Pozzo who, having finished eating, wipes his mouth
with the back of his hand.) Can't you see he wants to rest? Basket! (He strikes a match and
begins to light his pipe. Estragon sees the chicken bones on the ground and stares at them
greedily. As Lucky does not move Pozzo throws the match angrily away and jerks the rope.)
Basket! (Lucky starts, almost falls, recovers his senses, advances, puts the bottle in the basket
and goes back to his place. Estragon stares at the bones. Pozzo strikes another match and
lights his pipe.) What can you expect, it's not his job. (He pulls at his pipe, stretches out his
legs.) Ah! That's better.
ESTRAGON:
(timidly). Please Sir . . .
POZZO:
What is it, my good man?
ESTRAGON:
Er . . . you've finished with the . . . er . . . you don't need the . . . er . . . bones, Sir?
VLADIMIR:
(scandalized). You couldn't have waited?
POZZO:
No no, he does well to ask. Do I need the bones? (He turns them over with the end of his
whip.) No, personally I do not need them any more. (Estragon takes a step towards the
bones.) But . . . (Estragon stops short) . . . but in theory the bones go to the carrier. He is
therefore the one to ask. (Estragon turns towards Lucky, hesitates.) Go on, go on, don't be
afraid, ask him, he'll tell you.
Estragon goes towards Lucky, stops before him.
ESTRAGON:
Mister . . . excuse me, Mister . . .
POZZO:
You're being spoken to, pig! Reply! (To Estragon.) Try him again.
ESTRAGON:
Excuse me, Mister, the bones, you won't be wanting the bones?
Lucky looks long at Estragon.
POZZO:
(in raptures). Mister! (Lucky bows his head.) Reply! Do you want them or don't you?
(Silence of Lucky. To Estragon.) They're yours. (Estragon makes a dart at the bones, picks
them up and begins to gnaw them.) I don't like it. I've never known him to refuse a bone
before. (He looks anxiously at Lucky.) Nice business it'd be if he fell sick on me!
He puffs at his pipe.
VLADIMIR:
(exploding). It's a scandal!
Silence. Flabbergasted, Estragon stops gnawing, looks at Pozzo and Vladimir in turn. Pozzo
outwardly calm. Vladimir embarrassed.
POZZO:
(To Vladimir). Are you alluding to anything in particular?
VLADIMIR:
(stutteringly resolute). To treat a man . . . (gesture towards Lucky) . . . like that . . . I think that
. . . no . . . a human being . . . no . . . it's a scandal!
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
ESTRAGON:
(not to be outdone). A disgrace!
He resumes his gnawing.
POZZO:
You are severe. (To Vladimir.) What age are you, if it's not a rude question? (Silence.) Sixty?
Seventy? (To Estragon.) What age would you say he was?
ESTRAGON:
Eleven.
POZZO:
I am impertinent. (He knocks out his pipe against the whip, gets up.) I must be getting on.
Thank you for your society. (He reflects.) Unless I smoke another pipe before I go. What do
you say? (They say nothing.) Oh I'm only a small smoker, a very small smoker, I'm not in the
habit of smoking two pipes one on top of the other, it makes (hand to heart, sighing) my heart
go pit-a-pat. (Silence.) It's the nicotine, one absorbs it in spite of one's precautions. (Sighs.)
You know how it is. (Silence.) But perhaps you don't smoke? Yes? No? It's of no importance.
(Silence.) But how am I to sit down now, without affectation, now that I have risen? Without
appearing to –how shall I say– without appearing to falter. (To Vladimir.) I beg your pardon?
(Silence.) Perhaps you didn't speak? (Silence.) It's of no importance. Let me see . . .
He reflects.
ESTRAGON:
Ah! That's better.
He puts the bones in his pocket.
VLADIMIR:
Let's go.
ESTRAGON:
So soon?
POZZO:
One moment! (He jerks the rope.) Stool! (He points with his whip. Lucky moves the stool.)
More! There! (He sits down. Lucky goes back to his place.) Done it!
He fills his pipe.
VLADIMIR:
(vehemently). Let's go!
POZZO:
I hope I'm not driving you away. Wait a little longer, you'll never regret it.
ESTRAGON:
(scenting charity). We're in no hurry.
POZZO:
(having lit his pipe). The second is never so sweet . . . (he takes the pipe out of his mouth,
contemplates it) . . . as the first I mean. (He puts the pipe back in his mouth.) But it's sweet
just the same.
VLADIMIR:
I'm going.
POZZO:
He can no longer endure my presence. I am perhaps not particularly human, but who cares?
(To Vladimir.) Think twice before you do anything rash. Suppose you go now while it is still
day, for there is no denying it is still day. (They all look up at the sky.) Good. (They stop
looking at the sky.) What happens in that case– (he takes the pipe out of his mouth, examines
it) –I'm out– (he relights his pipe) –in that case– (puff) –in that case– (puff) –what happens in
that case to your appointment with this . . . Godet . . . Godot . . . Godin . . . anyhow you see
who I mean, who has your future in his hands . . . (pause) . . . at least your immediate future?
VLADIMIR:
Who told you?
POZZO:
He speaks to me again! If this goes on much longer we'll soon be old friends.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
ESTRAGON:
Why doesn't he put down his bags?
POZZO:
I too would be happy to meet him. The more people I meet the happier I become. From the
meanest creature one departs wiser, richer, more conscious of one's blessings. Even you . . .
(he looks at them ostentatiously in turn to make it clear they are both meant) . . . even you,
who knows, will have added to my store.
ESTRAGON:
Why doesn't he put down his bags?
POZZO:
But that would surprise me.
VLADIMIR:
You're being asked a question.
POZZO:
(delighted). A question! Who? What? A moment ago you were calling me Sir, in fear and
trembling. Now you're asking me questions. No good will come of this!
VLADIMIR:
(to Estragon). I think he's listening.
ESTRAGON:
(circling about Lucky). What?
VLADIMIR:
You can ask him now. He's on the alert.
ESTRAGON:
Ask him what?
VLADIMIR:
Why he doesn't put down his bags.
ESTRAGON:
I wonder.
VLADIMIR:
Ask him, can't you?
POZZO:
(who has followed these exchanges with anxious attention, fearing lest the question get lost).
You want to know why he doesn't put down his bags, as you call them.
VLADIMIR:
That's it.
POZZO:
(to Estragon). You are sure you agree with that?
ESTRAGON:
He's puffing like a grampus.
POZZO:
The answer is this. (To Estragon). But stay still, I beg of you, you're making me nervous!
VLADIMIR:
Here.
ESTRAGON:
What is it?
VLADIMIR:
He's about to speak.
Estragon goes over beside Vladimir. Motionless, side by side, they wait.
POZZO:
Good. Is everybody ready? Is everybody looking at me? (He looks at Lucky, jerks the rope.
Lucky raises his head.) Will you look at me, pig! (Lucky looks at him.) Good. (He puts the
pipe in his pocket, takes out a little vaporizer and sprays his throat, puts back the vaporizer in
his pocket, clears his throat, spits, takes out the vaporizer again, sprays his throat again, puts
back the vaporizer in his pocket.) I am ready. Is everybody listening? Is everybody ready?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
(He looks at them all in turn, jerks the rope.) Hog! (Lucky raises his head.) I don't like
talking in a vacuum. Good. Let me see.
He reflects.
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
POZZO:
What was it exactly you wanted to know?
VLADIMIR:
Why he—
POZZO:
(angrily). Don't interrupt me! (Pause. Calmer.) If we all speak at once we'll never get
anywhere. (Pause.) What was I saying? (Pause. Louder.) What was I saying?
Vladimir mimics one carrying a heavy burden. Pozzo looks at him, puzzled.
ESTRAGON:
(forcibly). Bags. (He points at Lucky.) Why? Always hold. (He sags, panting.) Never put
down. (He opens his hands, straightens up with relief.) Why?
POZZO:
Ah! Why couldn't you say so before? Why he doesn't make himself comfortable? Let's try and
get this clear. Has he not the right to? Certainly he has. It follows that he doesn't want to.
There's reasoning for you. And why doesn't he want to? (Pause.) Gentlemen, the reason is
this.
VLADIMIR:
(to Estragon). Make a note of this.
POZZO:
He wants to impress me, so that I'll keep him.
ESTRAGON:
What?
POZZO:
Perhaps I haven't got it quite right. He wants to mollify me, so that I'll give up the idea of
parting with him. No, that's not exactly it either.
VLADIMIR:
You want to get rid of him?
POZZO:
He wants to cod me, but he won't.
VLADIMIR:
You want to get rid of him?
POZZO:
He imagines that when I see how well he carries I'll be tempted to keep him on in that
capacity.
ESTRAGON:
You've had enough of him?
POZZO:
In reality he carries like a pig. It's not his job.
VLADIMIR:
You want to get rid of him?
POZZO:
He imagines that when I see him indefatigable I'll regret my decision. Such is his miserable
scheme. As though I were short of slaves! (All three look at Lucky.) Atlas, son of Jupiter!
(Silence.) Well, that's that, I think. Anything else?
Vaporizer.
VLADIMIR:
You want to get rid of him?
POZZO:
Remark that I might just as well have been in his shoes and he in mine. If chance had not
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
willed otherwise. To each one his due.
VLADIMIR:
You waagerrim?
POZZO:
I beg your pardon?
VLADIMIR:
You want to get rid of him?
POZZO:
I do. But instead of driving him away as I might have done, I mean instead of simply kicking
him out on his arse, in the goodness of my heart I am bringing him to the fair, where I hope to
get a good price for him. The truth is you can't drive such creatures away. The best thing
would be to kill them.
Lucky weeps.
ESTRAGON:
He's crying!
POZZO:
Old dogs have more dignity. (He proffers his handkerchief to Estragon.) Comfort him, since
you pity him. (Estragon hesitates.) Come on. (Estragon takes the handkerchief.) Wipe away
his tears, he'll feel less forsaken.
Estragon hesitates.
VLADIMIR:
Here, give it to me, I'll do it.
Estragon refuses to give the handkerchief.
Childish gestures.
POZZO:
Make haste, before he stops. (Estragon approaches Lucky and makes to wipe his eyes. Lucky
kicks him violently in the shins. Estragon drops the handkerchief, recoils, staggers about the
stage howling with pain.) Hanky!
Lucky puts down bag and basket, picks up handkerchief and gives it to Pozzo, goes back to his
place, picks up bag and basket.
ESTRAGON:
Oh the swine! (He pulls up the leg of his trousers.) He's crippled me!
POZZO:
I told you he didn't like strangers.
VLADIMIR:
(to Estragon). Show me. (Estragon shows his leg. To Pozzo, angrily.) He's bleeding!
POZZO:
It's a good sign.
ESTRAGON:
(on one leg). I'll never walk again!
VLADIMIR:
(tenderly). I'll carry you. (Pause.) If necessary.
POZZO:
He's stopped crying. (To Estragon.) You have replaced him as it were. (Lyrically.) The tears
of the world are a constant quantity. For each one who begins to weep, somewhere else
another stops. The same is true of the laugh. (He laughs.) Let us not then speak ill of our
generation, it is not any unhappier than its predecessors. (Pause.) Let us not speak well of it
either. (Pause.) Let us not speak of it at all. (Pause. Judiciously.) It is true the population has
increased.
VLADIMIR:
Try and walk.
Estragon takes a few limping steps, stops before Lucky and spits on him, then goes and sits
down on the mound.
POZZO:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
Guess who taught me all these beautiful things. (Pause. Pointing to Lucky.) My Lucky!
VLADIMIR:
(looking at the sky.) Will night never come?
POZZO:
But for him all my thoughts, all my feelings, would have been of common things. (Pause.
With extraordinary vehemence.) Professional worries! (Calmer.) Beauty, grace, truth of the
first water, I knew they were all beyond me. So I took a knook.
VLADIMIR:
(startled from his inspection of the sky). A knook?
POZZO:
That was nearly sixty years ago . . . (he consults his watch) . . . yes, nearly sixty. (Drawing
himself up proudly.) You wouldn't think it to look at me, would you? Compared to him I look
like a young man, no? (Pause.) Hat! (Lucky puts down the basket and takes off his hat. His
long white hair falls about his face. He puts his hat under his arm and picks up the basket.)
Now look. (Pozzo takes off his hat. [All four wear bowlers.] He is completely bald. He puts on his
hat again.) Did you see?
VLADIMIR:
And now you turn him away? Such an old and faithful servant!
ESTRAGON:
Swine!
Pozzo more and more agitated.
VLADIMIR:
After having sucked all the good out of him you chuck him away like a . . . like a banana skin.
Really . . .
POZZO:
(groaning, clutching his head). I can't bear it . . . any longer . . . the way he goes on . . . you've
no idea . . . it's terrible . . . he must go . . . (he waves his arms) . . . I'm going mad . . . (he
collapses, his head in his hands) . . . I can't bear it . . . any longer . . .
Silence. All look at Pozzo.
VLADIMIR:
He can't bear it.
ESTRAGON:
Any longer.
VLADIMIR:
He's going mad.
ESTRAGON:
It's terrible.
VLADIMIR:
(to Lucky). How dare you! It's abominable! Such a good master! Crucify him like that! After
so many years! Really!
POZZO:
(sobbing). He used to be so kind . . . so helpful . . . and entertaining . . . my good angel . . .
and now . . . he's killing me.
ESTRAGON:
( to Vladimir). Does he want to replace him?
VLADIMIR:
What?
ESTRAGON:
Does he want someone to take his place or not?
VLADIMIR:
I don't think so.
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
I don't know.
ESTRAGON:
Ask him.
POZZO:
(calmer). Gentlemen, I don't know what came over me. Forgive me. Forget all I said. (More
and more his old self.) I don't remember exactly what it was, but you may be sure there wasn't
a word of truth in it. (Drawing himself up, striking his chest.) Do I look like a man that can be
made to suffer? Frankly? (He rummages in his pockets.) What have I done with my pipe?
VLADIMIR:
Charming evening we're having.
ESTRAGON:
Unforgettable.
VLADIMIR:
And it's not over.
ESTRAGON:
Apparently not.
VLADIMIR:
It's only beginning.
ESTRAGON:
It's awful.
VLADIMIR:
Worse than the pantomime.
ESTRAGON:
The circus.
VLADIMIR:
The music-hall.
ESTRAGON:
The circus.
POZZO:
What can I have done with that briar?
ESTRAGON:
He's a scream. He's lost his dudeen.
Laughs noisily.
VLADIMIR:
I'll be back.
He hastens towards the wings.
ESTRAGON:
End of the corridor, on the left.
VLADIMIR:
Keep my seat.
Exit Vladimir.
POZZO:
(on the point of tears). I've lost my Kapp and Peterson!
ESTRAGON:
(convulsed with merriment). He'll be the death of me!
POZZO:
You didn't see by any chance– (He misses Vladimir.) Oh! He's gone! Without saying
goodbye! How could he! He might have waited!
ESTRAGON:
He would have burst.
POZZO:
Oh! (Pause.) Oh well then of course in that case . . .
ESTRAGON:
Come here.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
POZZO:
What for?
ESTRAGON:
You'll see.
POZZO:
You want me to get up?
ESTRAGON:
Quick! (Pozzo gets up and goes over beside Estragon. Estragon points off.) Look!
POZZO:
(having put on his glasses). Oh I say!
ESTRAGON:
It's all over.
Enter Vladimir, somber. He shoulders Lucky out of his way, kicks over the stool, comes and
goes agitatedly.
POZZO:
He's not pleased.
ESTRAGON:
(to Vladimir). You missed a treat. Pity.
Vladimir halts, straightens the stool, comes and goes, calmer.
POZZO:
He subsides. (Looking round.) Indeed all subsides. A great calm descends. (Raising his hand.)
Listen! Pan sleeps.
VLADIMIR:
Will night never come?
All three look at the sky.
POZZO:
You don't feel like going until it does?
ESTRAGON:
Well you see—
POZZO:
Why it's very natural, very natural. I myself in your situation, if I had an appointment with a
Godin . . . Godet . . . Godot . . . anyhow, you see who I mean, I'd wait till it was black night
before I gave up. (He looks at the stool.) I'd very much like to sit down, but I don't quite
know how to go about it.
ESTRAGON:
Could I be of any help?
POZZO:
If you asked me perhaps.
ESTRAGON:
What?
POZZO:
If you asked me to sit down.
ESTRAGON:
Would that be a help?
POZZO:
I fancy so.
ESTRAGON:
Here we go. Be seated, Sir, I beg of you.
POZZO:
No no, I wouldn't think of it! (Pause. Aside.) Ask me again.
ESTRAGON:
Come come, take a seat I beseech you, you'll get pneumonia.
POZZO:
You really think so?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
ESTRAGON:
Why it's absolutely certain.
POZZO:
No doubt you are right. (He sits down.) Done it again! (Pause.) Thank you, dear fellow. (He
consults his watch.) But I must really be getting along, if I am to observe my schedule.
VLADIMIR:
Time has stopped.
POZZO:
(cuddling his watch to his ear). Don't you believe it, Sir, don't you believe it. (He puts his
watch back in his pocket.) Whatever you like, but not that.
ESTRAGON:
(to Pozzo). Everything seems black to him today.
POZZO:
Except the firmament. (He laughs, pleased with this witticism.) But I see what it is, you are
not from these parts, you don't know what our twilights can do. Shall I tell you? (Silence.
Estragon is fiddling with his boot again, Vladimir with his hat.) I can't refuse you.
(Vaporizer.) A little attention, if you please. (Vladimir and Estragon continue their fiddling,
Lucky is half asleep. Pozzo cracks his whip feebly.) What's the matter with this whip? (He
gets up and cracks it more vigorously, finally with success. Lucky jumps. Vladimir's hat,
Estragon's boot, Lucky's hat, fall to the ground. Pozzo throws down the whip.) Worn out, this
whip. (He looks at Vladimir and Estragon.) What was I saying?
VLADIMIR:
Let's go.
ESTRAGON:
But take the weight off your feet, I implore you, you'll catch your death.
POZZO:
True. (He sits down. To Estragon.) What is your name?
ESTRAGON:
Adam.
POZZO:
(who hasn't listened). Ah yes! The night. (He raises his head.) But be a little more attentive,
for pity's sake, otherwise we'll never get anywhere. (He looks at the sky.) Look! (All look at
the sky except Lucky who is dozing off again. Pozzo jerks the rope.) Will you look at the sky,
pig! (Lucky looks at the sky.) Good, that's enough. (They stop looking at the sky.) What is
there so extraordinary about it? Qua sky. It is pale and luminous like any sky at this hour of
the day. (Pause.) In these latitudes. (Pause.) When the weather is fine. (Lyrical.) An hour ago
(he looks at his watch, prosaic) roughly (lyrical) after having poured forth even since (he
hesitates, prosaic) say ten o'clock in the morning (lyrical) tirelessly torrents of red and white
light it begins to lose its effulgence, to grow pale (gesture of the two hands lapsing by stages)
pale, ever a little paler, a little paler until (dramatic pause, ample gesture of the two hands
flung wide apart) pppfff! finished! it comes to rest. But– (hand raised in admonition)– but
behind this veil of gentleness and peace, night is charging (vibrantly) and will burst upon us
(snaps his fingers) pop! like that! (his inspiration leaves him) just when we least expect it.
(Silence. Gloomily.) That's how it is on this bitch of an earth.
Long silence.
ESTRAGON:
So long as one knows.
VLADIMIR:
One can bide one's time.
ESTRAGON:
One knows what to expect.
VLADIMIR:
No further need to worry.
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
Simply wait.
VLADIMIR:
We're used to it.
He picks up his hat, peers inside it, shakes it, puts it on.
POZZO:
How did you find me? (Vladimir and Estragon look at him blankly.) Good? Fair? Middling?
Poor? Positively bad?
VLADIMIR:
(first to understand). Oh very good, very very good.
POZZO:
(to Estragon). And you, Sir?
ESTRAGON:
Oh tray bong, tray tray tray bong.
POZZO:
(fervently). Bless you, gentlemen, bless you! (Pause.) I have such need of encouragement!
(Pause.) I weakened a little towards the end, you didn't notice?
VLADIMIR:
Oh perhaps just a teeny weeny little bit.
ESTRAGON:
I thought it was intentional.
POZZO:
You see my memory is defective.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
In the meantime, nothing happens.
POZZO:
You find it tedious?
ESTRAGON:
Somewhat.
POZZO:
(to Vladimir). And you, Sir?
VLADIMIR:
I've been better entertained.
Silence. Pozzo struggles inwardly.
POZZO:
Gentlemen, you have been . . . civil to me.
ESTRAGON:
Not at all!
VLADIMIR:
What an idea!
POZZO:
Yes yes, you have been correct. So that I ask myself is there anything I can do in my turn for
these honest fellows who are having such a dull, dull time.
ESTRAGON:
Even ten francs would be a help.
VLADIMIR:
We are not beggars!
POZZO:
Is there anything I can do, that's what I ask myself, to cheer them up? I have given them
bones, I have talked to them about this and that, I have explained the twilight, admittedly. But
is it enough, that's what tortures me, is it enough?
ESTRAGON:
Even five.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
(to Estragon, indignantly). That's enough!
ESTRAGON:
I couldn't accept less.
POZZO:
Is is enough? No doubt. But I am liberal. It's my nature. This evening. So much the worse for
me. (He jerks the rope. Lucky looks at him.) For I shall suffer, no doubt about that. (He picks
up the whip.) What do you prefer? Shall we have him dance, or sing, or recite, or think, or—
ESTRAGON:
Who?
POZZO:
Who! You know how to think, you two?
VLADIMIR:
He thinks?
POZZO:
Certainly. Aloud. He even used to think very prettily once, I could listen to him for hours.
Now . . . (he shudders). So much the worse for me. Well, would you like him to think
something for us?
ESTRAGON:
I'd rather he dance, it'd be more fun.
POZZO:
Not necessarily.
ESTRAGON:
Wouldn't it, Didi, be more fun?
VLADIMIR:
I'd like well to hear him think.
ESTRAGON:
Perhaps he could dance first and think afterwards, if it isn't too much to ask him.
VLADIMIR:
(to Pozzo). Would that be possible?
POZZO:
By all means, nothing simpler. It's the natural order.
He laughs briefly.
VLADIMIR:
Then let him dance.
Silence.
POZZO:
Do you hear, hog?
ESTRAGON:
He never refuses?
POZZO:
He refused once. (Silence.) Dance, misery!
Lucky puts down bag and basket, advances towards front, turns to Pozzo. Lucky dances. He
stops.
ESTRAGON:
Is that all?
POZZO:
Encore!
Lucky executes the same movements, stops.
ESTRAGON:
Pooh! I'd do as well myself. (He imitates Lucky, almost falls.) With a little practice.
POZZO:
He used to dance the farandole, the fling, the brawl, the jig, the fandango and even the
hornpipe. He capered. For joy. Now that's the best he can do. Do you know what he calls it?
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
The Scapegoat's Agony.
VLADIMIR:
The Hard Stool.
POZZO:
The Net. He thinks he's entangled in a net.
VLADIMIR:
(squirming like an aesthete). There's something about it . . .
Lucky makes to return to his burdens.
POZZO:
Woaa!
Lucky stiffens.
ESTRAGON:
Tell us about the time he refused.
POZZO:
With pleasure, with pleasure. (He fumbles in his pockets.) Wait. (He fumbles.) What have I
done with my spray? (He fumbles.) Well now isn't that . . . (He looks up, consternation on his
features. Faintly.) I can't find my pulverizer!
ESTRAGON:
(faintly). My left lung is very weak! (He coughs feebly. In ringing tones.) But my right lung
is as sound as a bell!
POZZO:
(normal voice). No matter! What was I saying. (He ponders.) Wait. (Ponders.) Well now isn't
that . . . (He raises his head.) Help me!
ESTRAGON:
Wait!
VLADIMIR:
Wait!
POZZO:
Wait!
All three take off their hats simultaneously, press their hands to their foreheads, concentrate.
ESTRAGON:
(triumphantly). Ah!
VLADIMIR:
He has it.
POZZO:
(impatient). Well?
ESTRAGON:
Why doesn't he put down his bags?
VLADIMIR:
Rubbish!
POZZO:
Are you sure?
VLADIMIR:
Damn it haven't you already told us?
POZZO:
I've already told you?
ESTRAGON:
He's already told us?
VLADIMIR:
Anyway he has put them down.
ESTRAGON:
(glance at Lucky). So he has. And what of it?
VLADIMIR:
Since he has put down his bags it is impossible we should have asked why he does not do so.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
POZZO:
Stoutly reasoned!
ESTRAGON:
And why has he put them down?
POZZO:
Answer us that.
VLADIMIR:
In order to dance.
ESTRAGON:
True!
POZZO:
True!
Silence. They put on their hats.
ESTRAGON:
Nothing happens, nobody comes, nobody goes, it's awful!
VLADIMIR:
(to Pozzo). Tell him to think.
POZZO:
Give him his hat.
VLADIMIR:
His hat?
POZZO:
He can't think without his hat.
VLADIMIR:
(to Estragon). Give him his hat.
ESTRAGON:
Me! After what he did to me! Never!
VLADIMIR:
I'll give it to him.
He does not move.
ESTRAGON:
(to Pozzo). Tell him to go and fetch it.
POZZO:
It's better to give it to him.
VLADIMIR:
I'll give it to him.
He picks up the hat and tenders it at arm's length to Lucky, who does not move.
POZZO:
You must put it on his head.
ESTRAGON:
(to Pozzo). Tell him to take it.
POZZO:
It's better to put it on his head.
VLADIMIR:
I'll put it on his head.
He goes round behind Lucky, approaches him cautiously, puts the hat on his head and recoils
smartly. Lucky does not move. Silence.
ESTRAGON:
What's he waiting for?
POZZO:
Stand back! (Vladimir and Estragon move away from Lucky. Pozzo jerks the rope. Lucky
looks at Pozzo.) Think, pig! (Pause. Lucky begins to dance.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Forward!
(Lucky advances.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Think!
Silence.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
LUCKY:
On the other hand with regard to—
POZZO:
Stop! (Lucky stops.) Back! (Lucky moves back.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Turn! (Lucky turns
towards auditorium.) Think!
During Lucky's tirade the others react as follows.
1) Vladimir and Estragon all attention, Pozzo dejected and disgusted.
2) Vladimir and Estragon begin to protest, Pozzo's sufferings increase.
3) Vladimir and Estragon attentive again, Pozzo more and more agitated and groaning.
4) Vladimir and Estragon protest violently. Pozzo jumps up, pulls on the rope. General outcry.
Lucky pulls on the rope, staggers, shouts his text. All three throw themselves on Lucky who
struggles and shouts his text.
LUCKY:
Given the existence as uttered forth in the public works of Puncher and Wattmann of a
personal God quaquaquaqua with white beard quaquaquaqua outside time without
extension who from the heights of divine apathia divine athambia divine aphasia loves
us dearly with some exceptions for reasons unknown but time will tell and suffers like
the divine Miranda with those who for reasons unknown but time will tell are plunged
in torment plunged in fire whose fire flames if that continues and who can doubt it will
fire the firmament that is to say blast hell to heaven so blue still and calm so calm with
a calm which even though intermittent is better than nothing but not so fast and
considering what is more that as a result of the labors left unfinished crowned by the
Acacacacademy of Anthropopopometry of Essy-in-Possy of Testew and Cunard it is
established beyond all doubt all other doubt than that which clings to the labors of men
that as a result of the labors unfinished of Testew and Cunnard it is established as
hereinafter but not so fast for reasons unknown that as a result of the public works of
Puncher and Wattmann it is established beyond all doubt that in view of the labors of
Fartov and Belcher left unfinished for reasons unknown of Testew and Cunard left
unfinished it is established what many deny that man in Possy of Testew and Cunard
that man in Essy that man in short that man in brief in spite of the strides of
alimentation and defecation wastes and pines wastes and pines and concurrently
simultaneously what is more for reasons unknown in spite of the strides of physical
culture the practice of sports such as tennis football running cycling swimming flying
floating riding gliding conating camogie skating tennis of all kinds dying flying sports
of all sorts autumn summer winter winter tennis of all kinds hockey of all sorts
penicillin and succedanea in a word I resume flying gliding golf over nine and eighteen
holes tennis of all sorts in a word for reasons unknown in Feckham Peckham Fulham
Clapham namely concurrently simultaneously what is more for reasons unknown but
time will tell fades away I resume Fulham Clapham in a word the dead loss per head
since the death of Bishop Berkeley being to the tune of one inch four ounce per head
approximately by and large more or less to the nearest decimal good measure round
figures stark naked in the stockinged feet in Connemara in a word for reasons unknown
no matter what matter the facts are there and considering what is more much more grave
that in the light of the labors lost of Steinweg and Peterman it appears what is more
much more grave that in the light the light the light of the labors lost of Steinweg and
Peterman that in the plains in the mountains by the seas by the rivers running water
running fire the air is the same and then the earth namely the air and then the earth in
the great cold the great dark the air and the earth abode of stones in the great cold alas
alas in the year of their Lord six hundred and something the air the earth the sea the
earth abode of stones in the great deeps the great cold on sea on land and in the air I
resume for reasons unknown in spite of the tennis the facts are there but time will tell I
resume alas alas on on in short in fine on on abode of stones who can doubt it I resume
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
but not so fast I resume the skull fading fading fading and concurrently simultaneously
what is more for reasons unknown in spite of the tennis on on the beard the flames the
tears the stones so blue so calm alas alas on on the skull the skull the skull the skull in
Connemara in spite of the tennis the labors abandoned left unfinished graver still abode
of stones in a word I resume alas alas abandoned unfinished the skull the skull in
Connemara in spite of the tennis the skull alas the stones Cunard (mêlée, final
vociferations)
#
 Image from timil.com
. . . tennis . . . the stones . . . so calm . . . Cunard . . . unfinished . . .
POZZO:
His hat!
Vladimir seizes Lucky's hat. Silence of Lucky. He falls. Silence. Panting of the victors.
ESTRAGON:
Avenged!
Vladimir examines the hat, peers inside it.
POZZO:
Give me that! (He snatches the hat from Vladimir, throws it on the ground, tramples on it.)
There's an end to his thinking!
VLADIMIR:
But will he be able to walk?
POZZO:
Walk or crawl! (He kicks Lucky.) Up pig!
ESTRAGON:
Perhaps he's dead.
VLADIMIR:
You'll kill him.
POZZO:
Up scum! (He jerks the rope.) Help me!
VLADIMIR:
How?
POZZO:
Raise him up!
Vladimir and Estragon hoist Lucky to his feet, support him an instant, then let him go. He
falls.
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
He's doing it on purpose!
POZZO:
You must hold him. (Pause.) Come on, come on, raise him up.
ESTRAGON:
To hell with him!
VLADIMIR:
Come on, once more.
ESTRAGON:
What does he take us for?
They raise Lucky, hold him up.
POZZO:
Don't let him go! (Vladimir and Estragon totter.) Don't move! (Pozzo fetches bag and basket
and brings them towards Lucky.) Hold him tight! (He puts the bag in Lucky's hand. Lucky
drops it immediately.) Don't let him go! (He puts back the bag in Lucky's hand. Gradually, at
the feel of the bag, Lucky recovers his senses and his fingers finally close round the handle.)
Hold him tight! (As before with basket.) #
Now! You can let him go. (Vladimir and Estragon move away from Lucky who totters, reels,
sags, but succeeds in remaining on his feet, bag and basket in his hands. Pozzo steps back,
cracks his whip.) Forward! (Lucky totters forward.) Back! (Lucky totters back.) Turn! (Lucky
turns.) Done it! He can walk. (Turning to Vladimir and Estragon.) Thank you, gentlemen, and
let me . . . (he fumbles in his pockets) . . . let me wish you . . . (fumbles) . . . wish you . . .
(fumbles) . . . what have I done with my watch? (Fumbles.) A genuine half-hunter,
gentlemen, with deadbeat escapement! (Sobbing.) Twas my granpa gave it to me! (He
searches on the ground, Vladimir and Estragon likewise. Pozzo turns over with his foot the
remains of Lucky's hat.) Well now isn't that just—
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps it's in your fob.
POZZO:
Wait! (He doubles up in an attempt to apply his ear to his stomach, listens. Silence.) I hear
nothing. (He beckons them to approach, Vladimir and Estragon go over to him, bend over his
stomach.) Surely one should hear the tick-tick.
VLADIMIR:
Silence!
All listen, bent double. #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
ESTRAGON:
I hear something.
POZZO:
Where?
VLADIMIR:
It's the heart.
POZZO:
(disappointed). Damnation!
VLADIMIR:
Silence!
ESTRAGON:
Perhaps it has stopped.
They straighten up.
POZZO:
Which of you smells so bad?
ESTRAGON:
He has stinking breath and I have stinking feet.
POZZO:
I must go.
ESTRAGON:
And your half-hunter?
POZZO:
I must have left it at the manor.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Then adieu.
POZZO:
Adieu.
VLADIMIR:
Adieu.
POZZO:
Adieu.
Silence. No one moves.
VLADIMIR:
Adieu.
POZZO:
Adieu.
ESTRAGON:
Adieu.
Silence.
POZZO:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
And thank you.
VLADIMIR:
Thank you.
POZZO:
Not at all.
ESTRAGON:
Yes yes.
POZZO:
No no.
VLADIMIR:
Yes yes.
ESTRAGON:
No no.
Silence.
POZZO:
I don't seem to be able . . . (long hesitation) . . . to depart.
ESTRAGON:
Such is life.
Pozzo turns, moves away from Lucky towards the wings, paying out the rope as he goes.
VLADIMIR:
You're going the wrong way.
POZZO:
I need a running start. (Having come to the end of the rope, i.e., off stage, he stops, turns and
cries.) Stand back! (Vladimir and Estragon stand back, look towards Pozzo. Crack of whip.)
On! On!
ESTRAGON:
On!
VLADIMIR:
On!
Lucky moves off.
POZZO:
Faster! (He appears, crosses the stage preceded by Lucky. Vladimir and Estragon wave their
hats. Exit Lucky.) On! On! (On the point of disappearing in his turn he stops and turns. The
rope tautens. Noise of Lucky falling off.) Stool! (Vladimir fetches stool and gives it to Pozzo
who throws it to Lucky.) Adieu!
VLADIMIR and ESTRAGON:
(waving). Adieu! Adieu!
POZZO:
Up! Pig! (Noise of Lucky getting up.) On! (Exit Pozzo.) Faster! On! Adieu! Pig! Yip! Adieu!
Long silence.
VLADIMIR:
That passed the time.
ESTRAGON:
It would have passed in any case.
VLADIMIR:
Yes, but not so rapidly.
Pause.
ESTRAGON:
What do we do now?
VLADIMIR:
I don't know.
ESTRAGON:
Let's go.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
We can't.
ESTRAGON:
Why not?
VLADIMIR:
We're waiting for Godot.
ESTRAGON:
(despairingly). Ah!
Pause.
VLADIMIR:
How they've changed!
ESTRAGON:
Who?
VLADIMIR:
Those two.
ESTRAGON:
That's the idea, let's make a little conversation.
VLADIMIR:
Haven't they?
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
Changed.
ESTRAGON:
Very likely. They all change. Only we can't.
VLADIMIR:
Likely! It's certain. Didn't you see them?
ESTRAGON:
I suppose I did. But I don't know them.
VLADIMIR:
Yes you do know them.
ESTRAGON:
No I don't know them.
VLADIMIR:
We know them, I tell you. You forget everything. (Pause. To himself.) Unless they're not the
same . . .
ESTRAGON:
Why didn't they recognize us then?
VLADIMIR:
That means nothing. I too pretended not to recognize them. And then nobody ever recognizes
us.
ESTRAGON:
Forget it. What we need– Ow! (Vladimir does not react.) Ow!
VLADIMIR:
(to himself). Unless they're not the same . . .
ESTRAGON:
Didi! It's the other foot!
He goes hobbling towards the mound.
VLADIMIR:
Unless they're not the same . . .
BOY:
(off). Mister!
Estragon halts. Both look towards the voice.
ESTRAGON:
Off we go again.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
VLADIMIR:
Approach, my child.
Enter Boy, timidly. He halts.
BOY:
Mister Albert . . . ?
VLADIMIR:
Yes.
ESTRAGON:
What do you want?
VLADIMIR:
Approach!
The Boy does not move.
ESTRAGON:
(forcibly). Approach when you're told, can't you?
The Boy advances timidly, halts.
VLADIMIR:
What is it?
BOY:
Mr. Godot . . .
VLADIMIR:
Obviously . . . (Pause.) Approach.
ESTRAGON:
(violently). Will you approach! (The Boy advances timidly.) What kept you so late?
VLADIMIR:
You have a message from Mr. Godot?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Well, what is it?
ESTRAGON:
What kept you so late?
The Boy looks at them in turn, not knowing to which he should reply.
VLADIMIR:
(to Estragon). Let him alone.
ESTRAGON:
(violently). You let me alone. (Advancing, to the Boy.) Do you know what time it is?
BOY:
(recoiling). It's not my fault, Sir.
ESTRAGON:
And whose is it? Mine?
BOY:
I was afraid, Sir.
ESTRAGON:
Afraid of what? Of us? (Pause.) Answer me!
VLADIMIR:
I know what it is, he was afraid of the others.
ESTRAGON:
How long have you been here?
BOY:
A good while, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
You were afraid of the whip?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
VLADIMIR:
The roars?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
The two big men.
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Do you know them?
BOY:
No Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Are you a native of these parts? (Silence.) Do you belong to these parts?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
ESTRAGON:
That's all a pack of lies. (Shaking the Boy by the arm.) Tell us the truth!
BOY:
(trembling). But it is the truth, Sir!
VLADIMIR:
Will you let him alone! What's the matter with you? #
(Estragon releases the Boy, moves away, covering his face with his hands. Vladimir and the
Boy observe him. Estragon drops his hands. His face is convulsed.) What's the matter with
you?
ESTRAGON:
I'm unhappy.
VLADIMIR:
Not really! Since when?
ESTRAGON:
I'd forgotten.
VLADIMIR:
Extraordinary the tricks that memory plays! (Estragon tries to speak, renounces, limps to his
place, sits down and begins to take off his boots. To Boy.) Well?
BOY:
Mr. Godot—
VLADIMIR:
I've seen you before, haven't I?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
BOY:
I don't know, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
You don't know me?
BOY:
No Sir.
VLADIMIR:
It wasn't you came yesterday?
BOY:
No Sir.
VLADIMIR:
This is your first time?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Words words. (Pause.) Speak.
BOY:
(in a rush). Mr. Godot told me to tell you he won't come this evening but surely tomorrow.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Is that all?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
You work for Mr. Godot?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
What do you do?
BOY:
I mind the goats, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Is he good to you?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
He doesn't beat you?
BOY:
No Sir, not me.
VLADIMIR:
Whom does he beat?
BOY:
He beats my brother, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Ah, you have a brother?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
What does he do?
BOY:
He minds the sheep, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
And why doesn't he beat you?
BOY:
I don't know, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
He must be fond of you.
BOY:
I don't know, Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Does he give you enough to eat? (The Boy hesitates.) Does he feed you well?
BOY:
Fairly well, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
You're not unhappy? (The Boy hesitates.) Do you hear me?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Well?
BOY:
I don't know, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
You don't know if you're unhappy or not?
BOY:
No Sir.
VLADIMIR:
You're as bad as myself. (Silence.) Where do you sleep?
BOY:
In the loft, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
With your brother?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
In the hay?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
All right, you may go.
BOY:
What am I to tell Mr. Godot, Sir?
VLADIMIR:
Tell him . . . (he hesitates) . . . tell him you saw us. (Pause.) You did see us, didn't you?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
He steps back, hesitates, turns and exit running. The light suddenly fails. In a moment it is
night. The moon rises at back, mounts in the sky, stands still, shedding a pale light on the
scene.
VLADIMIR:
At last! (Estragon gets up and goes towards Vladimir, a boot in each hand. He puts them
down at edge of stage, straightens and contemplates the moon.) #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
What are you doing?
ESTRAGON:
Pale for weariness.
VLADIMIR:
Eh?
ESTRAGON:
Of climbing heaven and gazing on the likes of us.
VLADIMIR:
Your boots, what are you doing with your boots?
ESTRAGON:
(turning to look at the boots). I'm leaving them there. (Pause.) Another will come, just as . . .
as . . . as me, but with smaller feet, and they'll make him happy.
VLADIMIR:
But you can't go barefoot!
ESTRAGON:
Christ did.
VLADIMIR:
Christ! What has Christ got to do with it. You're not going to compare yourself to Christ!
ESTRAGON:
All my life I've compared myself to him.
VLADIMIR:
But where he lived it was warm, it was dry!
ESTRAGON:
Yes. And they crucified quick.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
We've nothing more to do here.
ESTRAGON:
Nor anywhere else.
VLADIMIR:
Ah Gogo, don't go on like that. Tomorrow everything will be better.
ESTRAGON:
How do you make that out?
VLADIMIR:
Did you not hear what the child said?
ESTRAGON:
No.
VLADIMIR:
He said that Godot was sure to come tomorrow. (Pause.) What do you say to that?
ESTRAGON:
Then all we have to do is to wait on here.
VLADIMIR:
Are you mad? We must take cover. (He takes Estragon by the arm.) Come on.
He draws Estragon after him. Estragon yields, then resists. They halt.
ESTRAGON:
(looking at the tree). Pity we haven't got a bit of rope.
VLADIMIR:
Come on. It's cold.
He draws Estragon after him. As before.
ESTRAGON:
Remind me to bring a bit of rope tomorrow.
VLADIMIR:
Yes. Come on.
He draws him after him. As before.
ESTRAGON:
How long have we been together all the time now?
VLADIMIR:
I don't know. Fifty years maybe.
ESTRAGON:
Do you remember the day I threw myself into the Rhone?
VLADIMIR:
We were grape harvesting.
ESTRAGON:
You fished me out.
VLADIMIR:
That's all dead and buried.
ESTRAGON:
My clothes dried in the sun.
VLADIMIR:
There's no good harking back on that. Come on.
He draws him after him. As before.
ESTRAGON:
Wait!
VLADIMIR:
I'm cold!
ESTRAGON:
Wait! (He moves away from Vladimir.) I sometimes wonder if we wouldn't have been better
off alone, each one for himself. (He crosses the stage and sits down on the mound.) We
weren't made for the same road.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 1
http://www.samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html[4/24/2014 5:45:24 PM]
(without anger). It's not certain.
ESTRAGON:
No, nothing is certain.
Vladimir slowly crosses the stage and sits down beside Estragon. #
VLADIMIR:
We can still part, if you think it would be better.
ESTRAGON:
It's not worthwhile now.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
No, it's not worthwhile now.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Well, shall we go?
VLADIMIR:
Yes, let's go.
They do not move.
Curtain.
Top Act 2
Back to Samuel Beckett Resources
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
Waiting for Godot
ACT II
Act 1
Back to Samuel Beckett Resources
Next day. Same time.
Same place.
Estragon's boots front center, heels together, toes splayed. #
Lucky's hat at same place.
The tree has four or five leaves.
Enter Vladimir agitatedly. He halts and looks long at the tree, then suddenly begins to move
feverishly about the stage. He halts before the boots, picks one up, examines it, sniffs it,
manifests disgust, puts it back carefully. Comes and goes. Halts extreme right and gazes into
distance off, shading his eyes with his hand. Comes and goes. Halts extreme left, as before.
Comes and goes. Halts suddenly and begins to sing loudly.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
A dog came in–
Having begun too high he stops, clears his throat, resumes:
A dog came in the kitchen
And stole a crust of bread.
Then cook up with a ladle
And beat him till he was dead.
Then all the dogs came running
And dug the dog a tomb–
He stops, broods, resumes:
Then all the dogs came running
And dug the dog a tomb
And wrote upon the tombstone
For the eyes of dogs to come:
A dog came in the kitchen
And stole a crust of bread.
Then cook up with a ladle
And beat him till he was dead.
Then all the dogs came running
And dug the dog a tomb–
He stops, broods, resumes:
Then all the dogs came running
And dug the dog a tomb–
He stops, broods. Softly.
And dug the dog a tomb . . .
He remains a moment silent and motionless, then begins to move feverishly about the stage.
He halts before the tree, comes and goes, before the boots, comes and goes, halts extreme
right, gazes into distance, extreme left, gazes into distance. Enter Estragon right, barefoot,
head bowed. He slowly crosses the stage. Vladimir turns and sees him.
VLADIMIR:
You again! (Estragon halts but does not raise his head. Vladimir goes towards him.) Come
here till I embrace you.
ESTRAGON:
Don't touch me!
Vladimir holds back, pained.
VLADIMIR:
Do you want me to go away? (Pause.) Gogo! (Pause. Vladimir observes him attentively.) Did
they beat you? (Pause.) Gogo! (Estragon remains silent, head bowed.) Where did you spend
the night?
ESTRAGON:
Don't touch me! Don't question me! Don't speak to me! Stay with me!
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
Did I ever leave you?
ESTRAGON:
You let me go.
VLADIMIR:
Look at me. (Estragon does not raise his head. Violently.) Will you look at me!
Estragon raises his head. They look long at each other, then suddenly embrace, clapping each
other on the back. End of the embrace. Estragon, no longer supported, almost falls.
ESTRAGON:
What a day!
VLADIMIR:
Who beat you? Tell me.
ESTRAGON:
Another day done with.
VLADIMIR:
Not yet.
ESTRAGON:
For me it's over and done with, no matter what happens. (Silence.) I heard you singing.
VLADIMIR:
That's right, I remember.
ESTRAGON:
That finished me. I said to myself, He's all alone, he thinks I'm gone for ever, and he sings.
VLADIMIR:
One is not master of one's moods. All day I've felt in great form. (Pause.) I didn't get up in
the night, not once!
ESTRAGON:
(sadly). You see, you piss better when I'm not there.
VLADIMIR:
I missed you . . . and at the same time I was happy. Isn't that a strange thing?
ESTRAGON:
(shocked). Happy?
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps it's not quite the right word.
ESTRAGON:
And now?
VLADIMIR:
Now? . . . (Joyous.) There you are again . . . (Indifferent.) There we are again. . . (Gloomy.)
There I am again.
ESTRAGON:
You see, you feel worse when I'm with you. I feel better alone too.
VLADIMIR:
(vexed). Then why do you always come crawling back?
ESTRAGON:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
No, but I do. It's because you don't know how to defend yourself. I wouldn't have let them
beat you.
ESTRAGON:
You couldn't have stopped them.
VLADIMIR:
Why not?
ESTRAGON:
There was ten of them.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
No, I mean before they beat you. I would have stopped you from doing whatever it was you
were doing.
ESTRAGON:
I wasn't doing anything.
VLADIMIR:
Then why did they beat you?
ESTRAGON:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
Ah no, Gogo, the truth is there are things that escape you that don't escape me, you must feel it
yourself.
ESTRAGON:
I tell you I wasn't doing anything.
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps you weren't. But it's the way of doing it that counts, the way of doing it, if you want
to go on living.
ESTRAGON:
I wasn't doing anything.
VLADIMIR:
You must be happy too, deep down, if you only knew it.
ESTRAGON:
Happy about what?
VLADIMIR:
To be back with me again.
ESTRAGON:
Would you say so?
VLADIMIR:
Say you are, even if it's not true.
ESTRAGON:
What am I to say?
VLADIMIR:
Say, I am happy.
ESTRAGON:
I am happy.
VLADIMIR:
So am I.
ESTRAGON:
So am I.
VLADIMIR:
We are happy.
ESTRAGON:
We are happy. (Silence.) What do we do now, now that we are happy?
VLADIMIR:
Wait for Godot. (Estragon groans. Silence.) Things have changed here since yesterday.
ESTRAGON:
And if he doesn't come?
VLADIMIR:
(after a moment of bewilderment). We'll see when the time comes. (Pause.) I was saying that
things have changed here since yesterday.
ESTRAGON:
Everything oozes.
VLADIMIR:
Look at the tree.
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
It's never the same pus from one second to the next.
VLADIMIR:
The tree, look at the tree.
Estragon looks at the tree.
ESTRAGON:
Was it not there yesterday?
VLADIMIR:
Yes of course it was there. Do you not remember? We nearly hanged ourselves from it. But
you wouldn't. Do you not remember?
ESTRAGON:
You dreamt it.
VLADIMIR:
Is it possible you've forgotten already?
ESTRAGON:
That's the way I am. Either I forget immediately or I never forget.
VLADIMIR:
And Pozzo and Lucky, have you forgotten them too?
ESTRAGON:
Pozzo and Lucky?
VLADIMIR:
He's forgotten everything!
ESTRAGON:
I remember a lunatic who kicked the shins off me. Then he played the fool.
VLADIMIR:
That was Lucky.
ESTRAGON:
I remember that. But when was it?
VLADIMIR:
And his keeper, do you not remember him?
ESTRAGON:
He gave me a bone.
VLADIMIR:
That was Pozzo.
ESTRAGON:
And all that was yesterday, you say?
VLADIMIR:
Yes of course it was yesterday.
ESTRAGON:
And here where we are now?
VLADIMIR:
Where else do you think? Do you not recognize the place?
ESTRAGON:
(suddenly furious). Recognize! What is there to recognize? All my lousy life I've crawled
about in the mud! And you talk to me about scenery! (Looking wildly about him.) Look at this
muckheap! I've never stirred from it!
VLADIMIR:
Calm yourself, calm yourself.
ESTRAGON:
You and your landscapes! Tell me about the worms!
VLADIMIR:
All the same, you can't tell me that this (gesture) bears any resemblance to . . . (he hesitates) .
. . to the Macon country for example. You can't deny there's a big difference.
ESTRAGON:
The Macon country! Who's talking to you about the Macon country?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
But you were there yourself, in the Macon country.
ESTRAGON:
No I was never in the Macon country! I've puked my puke of a life away here, I tell you!
Here! In the Cackon country!
VLADIMIR:
But we were there together, I could swear to it! Picking grapes for a man called . . . (he snaps
his fingers) . . . can't think of the name of the man, at a place called . . . (snaps his fingers) . . .
can't think of the name of the place, do you not remember?
ESTRAGON:
(a little calmer). It's possible. I didn't notice anything.
VLADIMIR:
But down there everything is red!
ESTRAGON:
(exasperated). I didn't notice anything, I tell you!
Silence. Vladimir sighs deeply.
VLADIMIR:
You're a hard man to get on with, Gogo.
ESTRAGON:
It'd be better if we parted.
VLADIMIR:
You always say that and you always come crawling back.
ESTRAGON:
The best thing would be to kill me, like the other.
VLADIMIR:
What other? (Pause.) What other?
ESTRAGON:
Like billions of others.
VLADIMIR:
(sententious). To every man his little cross. (He sighs.) Till he dies. (Afterthought.) And is
forgotten.
ESTRAGON:
In the meantime let us try and converse calmly, since we are incapable of keeping silent.
VLADIMIR:
You're right, we're inexhaustible.
ESTRAGON:
It's so we won't think.
VLADIMIR:
We have that excuse.
ESTRAGON:
It's so we won't hear.
VLADIMIR:
We have our reasons.
ESTRAGON:
All the dead voices.
VLADIMIR:
They make a noise like wings.
ESTRAGON:
Like leaves.
VLADIMIR:
Like sand.
ESTRAGON:
Like leaves.
Silence.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
They all speak at once.
ESTRAGON:
Each one to itself.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Rather they whisper.
ESTRAGON:
They rustle.
VLADIMIR:
They murmur.
ESTRAGON:
They rustle.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
What do they say?
ESTRAGON:
They talk about their lives.
VLADIMIR:
To have lived is not enough for them.
ESTRAGON:
They have to talk about it.
VLADIMIR:
To be dead is not enough for them.
ESTRAGON:
It is not sufficient.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
They make a noise like feathers.
ESTRAGON:
Like leaves.
VLADIMIR:
Likes ashes.
ESTRAGON:
Like leaves.
Long silence.
VLADIMIR:
Say something!
ESTRAGON:
I'm trying.
Long silence.
VLADIMIR:
(in anguish). Say anything at all!
ESTRAGON:
What do we do now?
VLADIMIR:
Wait for Godot.
ESTRAGON:
Ah!
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
This is awful!
ESTRAGON:
Sing something.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
No no! (He reflects.) We could start all over again perhaps.
ESTRAGON:
That should be easy.
VLADIMIR:
It's the start that's difficult.
ESTRAGON:
You can start from anything.
VLADIMIR:
Yes, but you have to decide.
ESTRAGON:
True.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Help me!
ESTRAGON:
I'm trying.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
When you seek you hear.
ESTRAGON:
You do.
VLADIMIR:
That prevents you from finding.
ESTRAGON:
It does.
VLADIMIR:
That prevents you from thinking.
ESTRAGON:
You think all the same.
VLADIMIR:
No no, it's impossible.
ESTRAGON:
That's the idea, let's contradict each another.
VLADIMIR:
Impossible.
ESTRAGON:
You think so?
VLADIMIR:
We're in no danger of ever thinking any more.
ESTRAGON:
Then what are we complaining about?
VLADIMIR:
Thinking is not the worst.
ESTRAGON:
Perhaps not. But at least there's that.
VLADIMIR:
That what?
ESTRAGON:
That's the idea, let's ask each other questions.
VLADIMIR:
What do you mean, at least there's that?
ESTRAGON:
That much less misery.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
True.
ESTRAGON:
Well? If we gave thanks for our mercies?
VLADIMIR:
What is terrible is to have thought.
ESTRAGON:
But did that ever happen to us?
VLADIMIR:
Where are all these corpses from?
ESTRAGON:
These skeletons.
VLADIMIR:
Tell me that.
ESTRAGON:
True.
VLADIMIR:
We must have thought a little.
ESTRAGON:
At the very beginning.
VLADIMIR:
A charnel-house! A charnel-house!
ESTRAGON:
You don't have to look.
VLADIMIR:
You can't help looking.
ESTRAGON:
True.
VLADIMIR:
Try as one may.
ESTRAGON:
I beg your pardon?
VLADIMIR:
Try as one may.
ESTRAGON:
We should turn resolutely towards Nature.
VLADIMIR:
We've tried that.
ESTRAGON:
True.
VLADIMIR:
Oh it's not the worst, I know.
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
To have thought.
ESTRAGON:
Obviously.
VLADIMIR:
But we could have done without it.
ESTRAGON:
Que voulez-vous?
VLADIMIR:
I beg your pardon?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
ESTRAGON:
Que voulez-vouz.
VLADIMIR:
Ah! que voulez-vous. Exactly.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
That wasn't such a bad little canter.
VLADIMIR:
Yes, but now we'll have to find something else.
ESTRAGON:
Let me see.
He takes off his hat, concentrates.
VLADIMIR:
Let me see. (He takes off his hat, concentrates. Long silence.) Ah!
They put on their hats, relax.
ESTRAGON:
Well?
VLADIMIR:
What was I saying, we could go on from there.
ESTRAGON:
What were you saying when?
VLADIMIR:
At the very beginning.
ESTRAGON:
The very beginning of WHAT?
VLADIMIR:
This evening . . . I was saying . . . I was saying . . .
ESTRAGON:
I'm not a historian.
VLADIMIR:
Wait . . . we embraced . . . we were happy . . . happy . . . what do we do now that we're happy
. . . go on waiting . . . waiting . . . let me think . . . it's coming . . . go on waiting . . . now that
we're happy . . . let me see . . . ah! The tree!
ESTRAGON:
The tree?
VLADIMIR:
Do you not remember?
ESTRAGON:
I'm tired.
VLADIMIR:
Look at it.
They look at the tree.
ESTRAGON:
I see nothing.
VLADIMIR:
But yesterday evening it was all black and bare. And now it's covered with leaves.
ESTRAGON:
Leaves?
VLADIMIR:
In a single night.
ESTRAGON:
It must be the Spring.
VLADIMIR:
But in a single night!
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
ESTRAGON:
I tell you we weren't here yesterday. Another of your nightmares.
VLADIMIR:
And where were we yesterday evening according to you?
ESTRAGON:
How would I know? In another compartment. There's no lack of void.
VLADIMIR:
(sure of himself). Good. We weren't here yesterday evening. Now what did we do yesterday
evening?
ESTRAGON:
Do?
VLADIMIR:
Try and remember.
ESTRAGON:
Do . . . I suppose we blathered.
VLADIMIR:
(controlling himself). About what?
ESTRAGON:
Oh . . . this and that I suppose, nothing in particular. (With assurance.) Yes, now I remember,
yesterday evening we spent blathering about nothing in particular. That's been going on now
for half a century.
VLADIMIR:
You don't remember any fact, any circumstance?
ESTRAGON:
(weary). Don't torment me, Didi.
VLADIMIR:
The sun. The moon. Do you not remember?
ESTRAGON:
They must have been there, as usual.
VLADIMIR:
You didn't notice anything out of the ordinary?
ESTRAGON:
Alas!
VLADIMIR:
And Pozzo? And Lucky?
ESTRAGON:
Pozzo?
VLADIMIR:
The bones.
ESTRAGON:
They were like fishbones.
VLADIMIR:
It was Pozzo gave them to you.
ESTRAGON:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
And the kick.
ESTRAGON:
That's right, someone gave me a kick.
VLADIMIR:
It was Lucky gave it to you.
ESTRAGON:
And all that was yesterday?
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
Show me your leg.
ESTRAGON:
Which?
VLADIMIR:
Both. Pull up your trousers. (Estragon gives a leg to Vladimir, staggers. Vladimir takes the
leg. They stagger.) Pull up your trousers.
ESTRAGON:
I can't.
Vladimir pulls up the trousers, looks at the leg, lets it go. Estragon almost falls.
VLADIMIR:
The other. (Estragon gives the same leg.) The other, pig! (Estragon gives the other leg.
Triumphantly.) There's the wound! Beginning to fester!
ESTRAGON:
And what about it?
VLADIMIR:
(letting go the leg). Where are your boots?
ESTRAGON:
I must have thrown them away.
VLADIMIR:
When?
ESTRAGON:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
Why?
ESTRAGON:
(exasperated). I don't know why I don't know!
VLADIMIR:
No, I mean why did you throw them away?
ESTRAGON:
(exasperated). Because they were hurting me!
VLADIMIR:
(triumphantly, pointing to the boots). There they are! (Estragon looks at the boots.) At the
very spot where you left them yesterday!
Estragon goes towards the boots, inspects them closely.
ESTRAGON:
They're not mine.
VLADIMIR:
(stupefied). Not yours!
ESTRAGON:
Mine were black. These are brown.
VLADIMIR:
You're sure yours were black?
ESTRAGON:
Well they were a kind of gray.
VLADIMIR:
And these are brown. Show me.
ESTRAGON:
(picking up a boot). Well they're a kind of green.
VLADIMIR:
Show me. (Estragon hands him the boot. Vladimir inspects it, throws it down angrily.) Well
of all the—
ESTRAGON:
You see, all that's a lot of bloody—
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
Ah! I see what it is. Yes, I see what's happened.
ESTRAGON:
All that's a lot of bloody—
VLADIMIR:
It's elementary. Someone came and took yours and left you his.
ESTRAGON:
Why?
VLADIMIR:
His were too tight for him, so he took yours.
ESTRAGON:
But mine were too tight.
VLADIMIR:
For you. Not for him.
ESTRAGON:
(having tried in vain to work it out). I'm tired! (Pause.) Let's go.
VLADIMIR:
We can't.
ESTRAGON:
Why not?
VLADIMIR:
We're waiting for Godot.
ESTRAGON:
Ah! (Pause. Despairing.) What'll we do, what'll we do!
VLADIMIR:
There's nothing we can do.
ESTRAGON:
But I can't go on like this!
VLADIMIR:
Would you like a radish?
ESTRAGON:
Is that all there is?
VLADIMIR:
There are radishes and turnips.
ESTRAGON:
Are there no carrots?
VLADIMIR:
No. Anyway you overdo it with your carrots.
ESTRAGON:
Then give me a radish. (Vladimir fumbles in his pockets, finds nothing but turnips, finally
brings out a radish and hands it to Estragon who examines it, sniffs it.) It's black!
VLADIMIR:
It's a radish.
ESTRAGON:
I only like the pink ones, you know that!
VLADIMIR:
Then you don't want it?
ESTRAGON:
I only like the pink ones!
VLADIMIR:
Then give it back to me.
Estragon gives it back.
ESTRAGON:
I'll go and get a carrot.
He does not move.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
This is becoming really insignificant.
ESTRAGON:
Not enough.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
What about trying them.
ESTRAGON:
I've tried everything.
VLADIMIR:
No, I mean the boots.
ESTRAGON:
Would that be a good thing?
VLADIMIR:
It'd pass the time. (Estragon hesitates.) I assure you, it'd be an occupation.
ESTRAGON:
A relaxation.
VLADIMIR:
A recreation.
ESTRAGON:
A relaxation.
VLADIMIR:
Try.
ESTRAGON:
You'll help me?
VLADIMIR:
I will of course.
ESTRAGON:
We don't manage too badly, eh Didi, between the two of us?
VLADIMIR:
Yes yes. Come on, we'll try the left first.
ESTRAGON:
We always find something, eh Didi, to give us the impression we exist?
VLADIMIR:
(impatiently). Yes yes, we're magicians. But let us persevere in what we have resolved, before
we forget. (He picks up a boot.) Come on, give me your foot. (Estragon raises his foot.) The
other, hog! (Estragon raises the other foot.) Higher! #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
(Wreathed together they stagger about the stage. Vladimir succeeds finally in getting on the
boot.) Try and walk. (Estragon walks.) Well?
ESTRAGON:
It fits.
VLADIMIR:
(taking string from his pocket). We'll try and lace it.
ESTRAGON:
(vehemently). No no, no laces, no laces!
VLADIMIR:
You'll be sorry. Let's try the other. (As before.) Well?
ESTRAGON:
(grudgingly). It fits too.
VLADIMIR:
They don't hurt you?
ESTRAGON:
Not yet.
VLADIMIR:
Then you can keep them.
ESTRAGON:
They're too big.
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps you'll have socks some day.
ESTRAGON:
True.
VLADIMIR:
Then you'll keep them?
ESTRAGON:
That's enough about these boots.
VLADIMIR:
Yes, but—
ESTRAGON:
(violently). Enough! (Silence.) I suppose I might as well sit down.
He looks for a place to sit down, then goes and sits down on the mound.
VLADIMIR:
That's where you were sitting yesterday evening.
ESTRAGON:
If I could only sleep.
VLADIMIR:
Yesterday you slept.
ESTRAGON:
I'll try.
He resumes his foetal posture, his head between his knees.
VLADIMIR:
Wait. (He goes over and sits down beside Estragon and begins to sing in a loud voice.)
Bye bye bye bye
Bye bye– #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
ESTRAGON:
(looking up angrily). Not so loud!
VLADIMIR:
(softly).
Bye bye bye bye
Bye bye bye bye
Bye bye bye bye
Bye bye . . .
Estragon sleeps. Vladimir gets up softly, takes off his coat and lays it across Estragon's
shoulders, then starts walking up and down, swinging his arms to keep himself warm.
Estragon wakes with a start, jumps up, casts about wildly. Vladimir runs to him, puts his arms
around him.) There . . . there . . . Didi is here . . . don't be afraid . . .
ESTRAGON:
Ah!
VLADIMIR:
There . . . there . . . it's all over.
ESTRAGON:
I was falling—
VLADIMIR:
It's all over, it's all over.
ESTRAGON:
I was on top of a—
VLADIMIR:
Don't tell me! Come, we'll walk it off.
He takes Estragon by the arm and walks him up and down until Estragon refuses to go any
further.
ESTRAGON:
That's enough. I'm tired.
VLADIMIR:
You'd rather be stuck there doing nothing?
ESTRAGON:
Yes.
VLADIMIR:
Please yourself.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
He releases Estragon, picks up his coat and puts it on.
ESTRAGON:
Let's go.
VLADIMIR:
We can't.
ESTRAGON:
Why not?
VLADIMIR:
We're waiting for Godot.
ESTRAGON:
Ah! (Vladimir walks up and down.) Can you not stay still?
VLADIMIR:
I'm cold.
ESTRAGON:
We came too soon.
VLADIMIR:
It's always at nightfall.
ESTRAGON:
But night doesn't fall.
VLADIMIR:
It'll fall all of a sudden, like yesterday.
ESTRAGON:
Then it'll be night.
VLADIMIR:
And we can go.
ESTRAGON:
Then it'll be day again. (Pause. Despairing.) What'll we do, what'll we do!
VLADIMIR:
(halting, violently). Will you stop whining! I've had about my bellyful of your lamentations!
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
VLADIMIR:
(seeing Lucky's hat). Well!
ESTRAGON:
Farewell.
VLADIMIR:
Lucky's hat. (He goes towards it.) I've been here an hour and never saw it. (Very pleased.)
Fine!
ESTRAGON:
You'll never see me again.
VLADIMIR:
I knew it was the right place. Now our troubles are over. (He picks up the hat, contemplates it,
straightens it.) Must have been a very fine hat. (He puts it on in place of his own which he
hands to Estragon.) Here.
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
Hold that.
Estragon takes Vladimir's hat. Vladimir adjusts Lucky's hat on his head. Estragon puts on
Vladimir's hat in place of his own which he hands to Vladimir. Vladimir takes Estragon's hat.
Estragon adjusts Vladimir's hat on his head. Vladimir puts on Estragon's hat in place of
Lucky's which he hands to Estragon. Estragon takes Lucky's hat. Vladimir adjusts Estragon's
hat on his head. Estragon puts on Lucky's hat in place of Vladimir's which he hands to
Vladimir. Vladimir takes his hat, Estragon adjusts Lucky's hat on his head. Vladimir puts on
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
his hat in place of Estragon's which he hands to Estragon. Estragon takes his hat. Vladimir
adjusts his hat on his head. Estragon puts on his hat in place of Lucky's which he hands to
Vladimir. Vladimir takes Lucky's hat. Estragon adjusts his hat on his head. Vladimir puts on
Lucky's hat in place of his own which he hands to Estragon. Estragon takes Vladimir's hat.
Vladimir adjusts Lucky's hat on his head. Estragon hands Vladimir's hat back to Vladimir who
takes it and hands it back to Estragon who takes it and hands it back to Vladimir who takes it
and throws it down.
How does it fit me?
ESTRAGON:
How would I know?
VLADIMIR:
No, but how do I look in it?
He turns his head coquettishly to and fro, minces like a mannequin.
ESTRAGON:
Hideous.
VLADIMIR:
Yes, but not more so than usual?
ESTRAGON:
Neither more nor less.
VLADIMIR:
Then I can keep it. Mine irked me. (Pause.) How shall I say? (Pause.) It itched me.
He takes off Lucky's hat, peers into it, shakes it, knocks on the crown, puts it on again.
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Will you not play?
ESTRAGON:
Play at what?
VLADIMIR:
We could play at Pozzo and Lucky.
ESTRAGON:
Never heard of it.
VLADIMIR:
I'll do Lucky, you do Pozzo. (He imitates Lucky sagging under the weight of his baggage.
Estragon looks at him with stupefaction.) Go on.
ESTRAGON:
What am I to do?
VLADIMIR:
Curse me!
ESTRAGON:
(after reflection). Naughty!
VLADIMIR:
Stronger!
ESTRAGON:
Gonococcus! Spirochete!
Vladimir sways back and forth, doubled in two.
VLADIMIR:
Tell me to think.
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
Say, Think, pig!
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
Think, pig!
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
I can't.
ESTRAGON:
That's enough of that.
VLADIMIR:
Tell me to dance.
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
VLADIMIR:
Dance, hog! (He writhes. Exit Estragon left, precipitately.) I can't! (He looks up, misses
Estragon.) Gogo! (He moves wildly about the stage. Enter Estragon left, panting. He hastens
towards Vladimir, falls into his arms.) There you are again at last!
ESTRAGON:
I'm accursed!
VLADIMIR:
Where were you? I thought you were gone for ever.
ESTRAGON:
They're coming!
VLADIMIR:
Who?
ESTRAGON:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
How many?
ESTRAGON:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
(triumphantly). It's Godot! At last! Gogo! It's Godot! We're saved! Let's go and meet him! (He
drags Estragon towards the wings. Estragon resists, pulls himself free, exit right.) Gogo!
Come back! (Vladimir runs to extreme left, scans the horizon. Enter Estragon right, he
hastens towards Vladimir, falls into his arms.) There you are again again!
ESTRAGON:
I'm in hell!
VLADIMIR:
Where were you?
ESTRAGON:
They're coming there too!
VLADIMIR:
We're surrounded! (Estragon makes a rush towards back.) Imbecile! There's no way out there.
(He takes Estragon by the arm and drags him towards front. Gesture towards front.) There!
Not a soul in sight! Off you go! Quick! (He pushes Estragon towards auditorium. Estragon
recoils in horror.) You won't? (He contemplates auditorium.) Well I can understand that.
Wait till I see. (He reflects.) Your only hope left is to disappear.
ESTRAGON:
Where?
VLADIMIR:
Behind the tree. (Estragon hesitates.) Quick! Behind the tree. (Estragon goes and crouches
behind the tree, realizes he is not hidden, comes out from behind the tree.) Decidedly this tree
will not have been the slightest use to us.
ESTRAGON:
(calmer). I lost my head. Forgive me. It won't happen again. Tell me what to do.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
There's nothing to do.
ESTRAGON:
You go and stand there. (He draws Vladimir to extreme right and places him with his back to
the stage.) There, don't move, and watch out. (Vladimir scans horizon, screening his eyes with
his hand. Estragon runs and takes up same position extreme left. They turn their heads and
look at each other.) Back to back like in the good old days. (They continue to look at each
other for a moment, then resume their watch. Long silence.) Do you see anything coming?
VLADIMIR:
(turning his head). What?
ESTRAGON:
(louder). Do you see anything coming?
VLADIMIR:
No.
ESTRAGON:
Nor I.
They resume their watch. Silence.
VLADIMIR:
You must have had a vision.
ESTRAGON:
(turning his head). What?
VLADIMIR:
(louder). You must have had a vision.
ESTRAGON:
No need to shout!
They resume their watch. Silence.
VLADIMIR and ESTRAGON:
(turning simultaneously). Do you—
VLADIMIR:
Oh pardon!
ESTRAGON:
Carry on.
VLADIMIR:
No no, after you.
ESTRAGON:
No no, you first.
VLADIMIR:
I interrupted you.
ESTRAGON:
On the contrary.
They glare at each other angrily.
VLADIMIR:
Ceremonious ape!
ESTRAGON:
Punctilious pig!
VLADIMIR:
Finish your phrase, I tell you!
ESTRAGON:
Finish your own!
Silence. They draw closer, halt.
VLADIMIR:
Moron!
ESTRAGON:
That's the idea, let's abuse each other.
They turn, move apart, turn again and face each other.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
Moron!
ESTRAGON:
Vermin!
VLADIMIR:
Abortion!
ESTRAGON:
Morpion!
VLADIMIR:
Sewer-rat!
ESTRAGON:
Curate!
VLADIMIR:
Cretin!
ESTRAGON:
(with finality). Crritic!
VLADIMIR:
Oh!
He wilts, vanquished, and turns away.
ESTRAGON:
Now let's make it up.
VLADIMIR:
Gogo!
ESTRAGON:
Didi!
VLADIMIR:
Your hand!
ESTRAGON:
Take it!
VLADIMIR:
Come to my arms!
ESTRAGON:
Yours arms?
VLADIMIR:
My breast!
ESTRAGON:
Off we go!
They embrace. #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
They separate. Silence.
VLADIMIR:
How time flies when one has fun!
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
What do we do now?
VLADIMIR:
While waiting.
ESTRAGON:
While waiting.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
We could do our exercises.
ESTRAGON:
Our movements.
VLADIMIR:
Our elevations.
ESTRAGON:
Our relaxations.
VLADIMIR:
Our elongations.
ESTRAGON:
Our relaxations.
VLADIMIR:
To warm us up.
ESTRAGON:
To calm us down.
VLADIMIR:
Off we go.
Vladimir hops from one foot to the other. Estragon imitates him.
ESTRAGON:
(stopping). That's enough. I'm tired.
VLADIMIR:
(stopping). We're not in form. What about a little deep breathing?
ESTRAGON:
I'm tired breathing.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
You're right. (Pause.) Let's just do the tree, for the balance.
ESTRAGON:
The tree?
Vladimir does the tree, staggering about on one leg.
VLADIMIR:
(stopping). Your turn.
Estragon does the tree, staggers.
ESTRAGON:
Do you think God sees me?
VLADIMIR:
You must close your eyes.
Estragon closes his eyes, staggers worse.
ESTRAGON:
(stopping, brandishing his fists, at the top of his voice.) God have pity on me!
VLADIMIR:
(vexed). And me?
ESTRAGON:
On me! On me! Pity! On me!
Enter Pozzo and Lucky. Pozzo is blind. Lucky burdened as before. Rope as before, but much
shorter, so that Pozzo may follow more easily. Lucky wearing a different hat. At the sight of
Vladimir and Estragon he stops short. Pozzo, continuing on his way, bumps into him.
VLADIMIR:
Gogo!
POZZO:
(clutching onto Lucky who staggers). What is it? Who is it?
Lucky falls, drops everything and brings down Pozzo with him. They lie helpless among the
scattered baggage.
ESTRAGON:
Is it Godot?
VLADIMIR:
At last! (He goes towards the heap.) Reinforcements at last!
POZZO:
Help!
ESTRAGON:
Is it Godot?
VLADIMIR:
We were beginning to weaken. Now we're sure to see the evening out.
POZZO:
Help!
ESTRAGON:
Do you hear him?
VLADIMIR:
We are no longer alone, waiting for the night, waiting for Godot, waiting for . . . waiting. All
evening we have struggled, unassisted. Now it's over. It's already tomorrow.
POZZO:
Help!
VLADIMIR:
Time flows again already. The sun will set, the moon rise, and we away . . . from here.
POZZO:
Pity!
VLADIMIR:
Poor Pozzo!
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
I knew it was him.
VLADIMIR:
Who?
ESTRAGON:
Godot.
VLADIMIR:
But it's not Godot.
ESTRAGON:
It's not Godot?
VLADIMIR:
It's not Godot.
ESTRAGON:
Then who is it?
VLADIMIR:
It's Pozzo.
POZZO:
Here! Here! Help me up!
VLADIMIR:
He can't get up.
ESTRAGON:
Let's go.
VLADIMIR:
We can't.
ESTRAGON:
Why not?
VLADIMIR:
We're waiting for Godot.
ESTRAGON:
Ah!
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps he has another bone for you.
ESTRAGON:
Bone?
VLADIMIR:
Chicken. Do you not remember?
ESTRAGON:
It was him?
VLADIMIR:
Yes.
ESTRAGON:
Ask him.
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps we should help him first.
ESTRAGON:
To do what?
VLADIMIR:
To get up.
ESTRAGON:
He can't get up?
VLADIMIR:
He wants to get up.
ESTRAGON:
Then let him get up.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
He can't.
ESTRAGON:
Why not?
VLADIMIR:
I don't know.
Pozzo writhes, groans, beats the ground with his fists.
ESTRAGON:
We should ask him for the bone first. Then if he refuses we'll leave him there.
VLADIMIR:
You mean we have him at our mercy?
ESTRAGON:
Yes.
VLADIMIR:
And that we should subordinate our good offices to certain conditions?
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
That seems intelligent all right. But there's one thing I'm afraid of.
POZZO:
Help!
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
That Lucky might get going all of a sudden. Then we'd be ballocksed.
ESTRAGON:
Lucky?
VLADIMIR:
The one that went for you yesterday.
ESTRAGON:
I tell you there was ten of them.
VLADIMIR:
No, before that, the one that kicked you.
ESTRAGON:
Is he there?
VLADIMIR:
As large as life. (Gesture towards Lucky.) For the moment he is inert. But he might run
amuck any minute.
POZZO:
Help!
ESTRAGON:
And suppose we gave him a good beating, the two of us.
VLADIMIR:
You mean if we fell on him in his sleep?
ESTRAGON:
Yes.
VLADIMIR:
That seems a good idea all right. But could we do it? Is he really asleep? (Pause.) No, the
best would be to take advantage of Pozzo's calling for help—
POZZO:
Help!
VLADIMIR:
To help him—
ESTRAGON:
We help him?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
In anticipation of some tangible return.
ESTRAGON:
And suppose he—
VLADIMIR:
Let us not waste our time in idle discourse! (Pause. Vehemently.) Let us do something, while
we have the chance! It is not every day that we are needed. Not indeed that we personally are
needed. Others would meet the case equally well, if not better. To all mankind they were
addressed, those cries for help still ringing in our ears! But at this place, at this moment of
time, all mankind is us, whether we like it or not. Let us make the most of it, before it is too
late! Let us represent worthily for once the foul brood to which a cruel fate consigned us!
What do you say? (Estragon says nothing.) It is true that when with folded arms we weigh the
pros and cons we are no less a credit to our species. The tiger bounds to the help of his
congeners without the least reflection, or else he slinks away into the depths of the thickets.
But that is not the question. What are we doing here, that is the question. And we are blessed
in this, that we happen to know the answer. Yes, in this immense confusion one thing alone is
clear. We are waiting for Godot to come—
ESTRAGON:
Ah!
POZZO:
Help!
VLADIMIR:
Or for night to fall. (Pause.) We have kept our appointment and that's an end to that. We are
not saints, but we have kept our appointment. How many people can boast as much?
ESTRAGON:
Billions.
VLADIMIR:
You think so?
ESTRAGON:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
You may be right.
POZZO:
Help! #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
All I know is that the hours are long, under these conditions, and constrain us to beguile them
with proceedings which –how shall I say– which may at first sight seem reasonable, until they
become a habit. You may say it is to prevent our reason from foundering. No doubt. But has it
not long been straying in the night without end of the abyssal depths? That's what I
sometimes wonder. You follow my reasoning?
ESTRAGON:
(aphoristic for once). We are all born mad. Some remain so.
POZZO:
Help! I'll pay you!
ESTRAGON:
How much?
POZZO:
One hundred francs!
ESTRAGON:
It's not enough.
VLADIMIR:
I wouldn't go so far as that.
ESTRAGON:
You think it's enough?
VLADIMIR:
No, I mean so far as to assert that I was weak in the head when I came into the world. But that
is not the question.
POZZO:
Two hundred!
VLADIMIR:
We wait. We are bored. (He throws up his hand.) No, don't protest, we are bored to death,
there's no denying it. Good. A diversion comes along and what do we do? We let it go to
waste. Come, let's get to work! (He advances towards the heap, stops in his stride.) In an
instant all will vanish and we'll be alone once more, in the midst of nothingness!
He broods.
POZZO:
Two hundred!
VLADIMIR:
We're coming!
He tries to pull Pozzo to his feet, fails, tries again, stumbles, falls, tries to get up, fails.
ESTRAGON:
What's the matter with you all?
VLADIMIR:
Help!
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
VLADIMIR:
Don't leave me! They'll kill me!
POZZO:
Where am I?
VLADIMIR:
Gogo!
POZZO:
Help!
VLADIMIR:
Help!
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
Help me up first, then we'll go together.
ESTRAGON:
You promise?
VLADIMIR:
I swear it!
ESTRAGON:
And we'll never come back?
VLADIMIR:
Never!
ESTRAGON:
We'll go to the Pyrenees.
VLADIMIR:
Wherever you like.
ESTRAGON:
I've always wanted to wander in the Pyrenees.
VLADIMIR:
You'll wander in them.
ESTRAGON:
(recoiling). Who farted?
VLADIMIR:
Pozzo.
POZZO:
Here! Here! Pity!
ESTRAGON:
It's revolting!
VLADIMIR:
Quick! Give me your hand!
ESTRAGON:
I'm going. (Pause. Louder.) I'm going.
VLADIMIR:
Well I suppose in the end I'll get up by myself. (He tries, fails.) In the fullness of time.
ESTRAGON:
What's the matter with you?
VLADIMIR:
Go to hell.
ESTRAGON:
Are you staying there?
VLADIMIR:
For the time being.
ESTRAGON:
Come on, get up, you'll catch a chill.
VLADIMIR:
Don't worry about me.
ESTRAGON:
Come on, Didi, don't be pig-headed!
He stretches out his hand which Vladimir makes haste to seize.
VLADIMIR:
Pull!
Estragon pulls, stumbles, falls. Long silence.
POZZO:
Help!
VLADIMIR:
We've arrived.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
POZZO:
Who are you?
VLADIMIR:
We are men.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Sweet mother earth!
VLADIMIR:
Can you get up?
ESTRAGON:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
Try.
ESTRAGON:
Not now, not now.
Silence.
POZZO:
What happened?
VLADIMIR:
(violently). Will you stop it, you! Pest! He can think of nothing but himself!
ESTRAGON:
What about a little snooze?
VLADIMIR:
Did you hear him? He wants to know what happened!
ESTRAGON:
Don't mind him. Sleep.
Silence.
POZZO:
Pity! Pity!
ESTRAGON:
(with a start). What is it?
VLADIMIR:
Were you asleep?
ESTRAGON:
I must have been.
VLADIMIR:
It's this bastard Pozzo at it again.
ESTRAGON:
Make him stop it. Kick him in the crotch.
VLADIMIR:
(striking Pozzo). Will you stop it! Crablouse! (Pozzo extricates himself with cries of pain and
crawls away. He stops, saws the air blindly, calling for help. Vladimir, propped on his elbow,
observes his retreat.) He's off! (Pozzo collapses.) He's down!
#
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
ESTRAGON:
What do we do now?
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps I could crawl to him.
ESTRAGON:
Don't leave me!
VLADIMIR:
Or I could call to him.
ESTRAGON:
Yes, call to him.
VLADIMIR:
Pozzo! (Silence.) Pozzo! (Silence.) No reply.
ESTRAGON:
Together.
VLADIMIR and ESTRAGON:
Pozzo! Pozzo!
VLADIMIR:
He moved.
ESTRAGON:
Are you sure his name is Pozzo?
VLADIMIR:
(alarmed). Mr. Pozzo! Come back! We won't hurt you!
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
We might try him with other names.
VLADIMIR:
I'm afraid he's dying.
ESTRAGON:
It'd be amusing.
VLADIMIR:
What'd be amusing?
ESTRAGON:
To try him with other names, one after the other. It'd pass the time. And we'd be bound to hit
on the right one sooner or later.
VLADIMIR:
I tell you his name is Pozzo.
ESTRAGON:
We'll soon see. (He reflects.) Abel! Abel!
POZZO:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
Help!
ESTRAGON:
Got it in one!
VLADIMIR:
I begin to weary of this motif.
ESTRAGON:
Perhaps the other is called Cain. Cain! Cain!
POZZO:
Help!
ESTRAGON:
He's all humanity. (Silence.) Look at the little cloud.
VLADIMIR:
(raising his eyes). Where?
ESTRAGON:
There. In the zenith.
VLADIMIR:
Well? (Pause.) What is there so wonderful about it?
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Let's pass on now to something else, do you mind?
VLADIMIR:
I was just going to suggest it.
ESTRAGON:
But to what?
VLADIMIR:
Ah!
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Suppose we got up to begin with?
VLADIMIR:
No harm trying.
They get up.
ESTRAGON:
Child's play.
VLADIMIR:
Simple question of will-power.
ESTRAGON:
And now?
POZZO:
Help!
ESTRAGON:
Let's go.
VLADIMIR:
We can't.
ESTRAGON:
Why not?
VLADIMIR:
We're waiting for Godot.
ESTRAGON:
Ah! (Despairing.) What'll we do, what'll we do!
POZZO:
Help!
VLADIMIR:
What about helping him?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
ESTRAGON:
What does he want?
VLADIMIR:
He wants to get up.
ESTRAGON:
Then why doesn't he?
VLADIMIR:
He wants us to help him get up.
ESTRAGON:
Then why don't we? What are we waiting for?
They help Pozzo to his feet, let him go. He falls.
VLADIMIR:
We must hold him. (They get him up again. Pozzo sags between them, his arms round their
necks.) #
Feeling better?
POZZO:
Who are you?
VLADIMIR:
Do you not recognize us?
POZZO:
I am blind.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Perhaps he can see into the future.
VLADIMIR:
Since when?
POZZO:
I used to have wonderful sight— but are you friends?
ESTRAGON:
(laughing noisily). He wants to know if we are friends!
VLADIMIR:
No, he means friends of his.
ESTRAGON:
Well?
VLADIMIR:
We've proved we are, by helping him.
ESTRAGON:
Exactly. Would we have helped him if we weren't his friends?
VLADIMIR:
Possibly.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
ESTRAGON:
True.
VLADIMIR:
Don't let's quibble about that now.
POZZO:
You are not highwaymen?
ESTRAGON:
Highwaymen! Do we look like highwaymen?
VLADIMIR:
Damn it, can't you see the man is blind!
ESTRAGON:
Damn it, so he is. (Pause.) So he says.
POZZO:
Don't leave me!
VLADIMIR:
No question of it.
ESTRAGON:
For the moment.
POZZO:
What time is it?
VLADIMIR:
(inspecting the sky). Seven o'clock . . . eight o'clock . . .
ESTRAGON:
That depends what time of year it is.
POZZO:
Is it evening?
Silence. Vladimir and Estragon scrutinize the sunset.
ESTRAGON:
It's rising.
VLADIMIR:
Impossible.
ESTRAGON:
Perhaps it's the dawn.
VLADIMIR:
Don't be a fool. It's the west over there.
ESTRAGON:
How do you know?
POZZO:
(anguished). Is it evening?
VLADIMIR:
Anyway, it hasn't moved.
ESTRAGON:
I tell you it's rising.
POZZO:
Why don't you answer me?
ESTRAGON:
Give us a chance.
VLADIMIR:
(reassuring). It's evening, Sir, it's evening, night is drawing nigh. My friend here would have
me doubt it and I must confess he shook me for a moment. But it is not for nothing I have
lived through this long day and I can assure you it is very near the end of its repertory.
(Pause.) How do you feel now?
ESTRAGON:
How much longer are we to cart him around? (They half release him, catch him again as he
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
falls.) We are not caryatids!
VLADIMIR:
You were saying your sight used to be good, if I heard you right.
POZZO:
Wonderful! Wonderful, wonderful sight!
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
(irritably). Expand! Expand!
VLADIMIR:
Let him alone. Can't you see he's thinking of the days when he was happy. (Pause.) Memoria
praeteritorum bonorum— that must be unpleasant.
ESTRAGON:
We wouldn't know.
VLADIMIR:
And it came on you all of a sudden?
POZZO:
Quite wonderful!
VLADIMIR:
I'm asking you if it came on you all of a sudden.
POZZO:
I woke up one fine day as blind as Fortune. (Pause.) Sometimes I wonder if I'm not still
asleep.
VLADIMIR:
And when was that?
POZZO:
I don't know.
VLADIMIR:
But no later than yesterday—
POZZO:
(violently). Don't question me! The blind have no notion of time. The things of time are
hidden from them too.
VLADIMIR:
Well just fancy that! I could have sworn it was just the opposite.
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
POZZO:
Where are we?
VLADIMIR:
I couldn't tell you.
POZZO:
It isn't by any chance the place known as the Board?
VLADIMIR:
Never heard of it.
POZZO:
What is it like?
VLADIMIR:
(looking round). It's indescribable. It's like nothing. There's nothing. There's a tree.
POZZO:
Then it's not the Board.
ESTRAGON:
(sagging). Some diversion!
POZZO:
Where is my menial?
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
He's about somewhere.
POZZO:
Why doesn't he answer when I call?
VLADIMIR:
I don't know. He seems to be sleeping. Perhaps he's dead.
POZZO:
What happened, exactly?
ESTRAGON:
Exactly!
VLADIMIR:
The two of you slipped. (Pause.) And fell.
POZZO:
Go and see is he hurt.
VLADIMIR:
We can't leave you.
POZZO:
You needn't both go.
VLADIMIR:
(to Estragon). You go.
ESTRAGON:
After what he did to me? Never!
POZZO:
Yes yes, let your friend go, he stinks so. (Silence.) What is he waiting for?
VLADIMIR:
What are you waiting for?
ESTRAGON:
I'm waiting for Godot.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
What exactly should he do?
POZZO:
Well to begin with he should pull on the rope, as hard as he likes so long as he doesn't
strangle him. He usually responds to that. If not he should give him a taste of his boot, in the
face and the privates as far as possible.
VLADIMIR:
(to Estragon). You see, you've nothing to be afraid of. It's even an opportunity to revenge
yourself.
ESTRAGON:
And if he defends himself?
POZZO:
No no, he never defends himself.
VLADIMIR:
I'll come flying to the rescue.
ESTRAGON:
Don't take your eyes off me.
He goes towards Lucky.
VLADIMIR:
Make sure he's alive before you start. No point in exerting yourself if he's dead.
ESTRAGON:
(bending over Lucky). He's breathing.
VLADIMIR:
Then let him have it.
With sudden fury Estragon starts kicking Lucky, hurling abuse at him as he does so. But he
hurts his foot and moves away, limping and groaning. Lucky stirs.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
ESTRAGON:
Oh the brute!
He sits down on the mound and tries to take off his boot. But he soon desists and disposes
himself for sleep, his arms on his knees and his head on his arms.
POZZO:
What's gone wrong now?
VLADIMIR:
My friend has hurt himself.
POZZO:
And Lucky?
VLADIMIR:
So it is he?
POZZO:
What?
VLADIMIR:
It is Lucky?
POZZO:
I don't understand.
VLADIMIR:
And you are Pozzo?
POZZO:
Certainly I am Pozzo.
VLADIMIR:
The same as yesterday?
POZZO:
Yesterday?
VLADIMIR:
We met yesterday. (Silence.) Do you not remember?
POZZO:
I don't remember having met anyone yesterday. But tomorrow I won't remember having met
anyone today. So don't count on me to enlighten you.
VLADIMIR:
But—
POZZO:
Enough! Up pig!
VLADIMIR:
You were bringing him to the fair to sell him. You spoke to us. He danced. He thought. You
had your sight.
POZZO:
As you please. Let me go! (Vladimir moves away.) Up!
Lucky gets up, gathers up his burdens.
VLADIMIR:
Where do you go from here?
POZZO:
On. (Lucky, laden down, takes his place before Pozzo.) Whip! (Lucky puts everything down,
looks for whip, finds it, puts it into Pozzo's hand, takes up everything again.) Rope!
Lucky puts everything down, puts end of rope into Pozzo's hand, takes up everything again.
VLADIMIR:
What is there in the bag?
POZZO:
Sand. (He jerks the rope.) On!
VLADIMIR:
Don't go yet.
POZZO:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
I'm going.
VLADIMIR:
What do you do when you fall far from help?
POZZO:
We wait till we can get up. Then we go on. On!
VLADIMIR:
Before you go tell him to sing.
POZZO:
Who?
VLADIMIR:
Lucky.
POZZO:
To sing?
VLADIMIR:
Yes. Or to think. Or to recite.
POZZO:
But he is dumb.
VLADIMIR:
Dumb!
POZZO:
Dumb. He can't even groan.
VLADIMIR:
Dumb! Since when?
POZZO:
(suddenly furious.) Have you not done tormenting me with your accursed time! It's
abominable! When! When! One day, is that not enough for you, one day he went dumb, one
day I went blind, one day we'll go deaf, one day we were born, one day we shall die, the
same day, the same second, is that not enough for you? (Calmer.) They give birth astride of
a grave, the light gleams an instant, then it's night once more. (He jerks the rope.) On!
Exeunt Pozzo and Lucky. Vladimir follows them to the edge of the stage, looks after them. The
noise of falling, reinforced by mimic of Vladimir, announces that they are down again.
Silence. Vladimir goes towards Estragon, contemplates him a moment, then shakes him awake.
ESTRAGON:
(wild gestures, incoherent words. Finally.) Why will you never let me sleep?
VLADIMIR:
I felt lonely.
ESTRAGON:
I was dreaming I was happy.
VLADIMIR:
That passed the time.
ESTRAGON:
I was dreaming that—
VLADIMIR:
(violently). Don't tell me! (Silence.) I wonder is he really blind.
ESTRAGON:
Blind? Who?
VLADIMIR:
Pozzo.
ESTRAGON:
Blind?
VLADIMIR:
He told us he was blind.
ESTRAGON:
Well what about it?
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
VLADIMIR:
It seemed to me he saw us.
ESTRAGON:
You dreamt it. (Pause.) Let's go. We can't. Ah! (Pause.) Are you sure it wasn't him?
VLADIMIR:
Who?
ESTRAGON:
Godot.
VLADIMIR:
But who?
ESTRAGON:
Pozzo.
VLADIMIR:
Not at all! (Less sure.) Not at all! (Still less sure.) Not at all!
ESTRAGON:
I suppose I might as well get up. (He gets up painfully.) Ow! Didi!
VLADIMIR:
I don't know what to think any more.
ESTRAGON:
My feet! (He sits down again and tries to take off his boots.) Help me!
VLADIMIR:
Was I sleeping, while the others suffered? Am I sleeping now? Tomorrow, when I wake, or
think I do, what shall I say of today? That with Estragon my friend, at this place, until the fall
of night, I waited for Godot? That Pozzo passed, with his carrier, and that he spoke to us?
Probably. But in all that what truth will there be?
(Estragon, having struggled with his boots in vain, is dozing off again. Vladimir looks at him.)
He'll know nothing. He'll tell me about the blows he received and I'll give him a carrot.
(Pause.) Astride of a grave and a difficult birth. Down in the hole, lingeringly, the grave
digger puts on the forceps. We have time to grow old. The air is full of our cries. (He listens.)
But habit is a great deadener. (He looks again at Estragon.) At me too someone is looking, of
me too someone is saying, He is sleeping, he knows nothing, let him sleep on. (Pause.) I can't
go on! (Pause.) What have I said?
He goes feverishly to and fro, halts finally at extreme left, broods. Enter Boy right. He halts.
Silence.
BOY:
Mister . . . (Vladimir turns.) Mister Albert . . .
VLADIMIR:
Off we go again. (Pause.) Do you not recognize me?
BOY:
No Sir.
VLADIMIR:
It wasn't you came yesterday.
BOY:
No Sir.
VLADIMIR:
This is your first time.
BOY:
Yes Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
You have a message from Mr. Godot.
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
He won't come this evening.
BOY:
No Sir.
VLADIMIR:
But he'll come tomorrow.
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Without fail.
BOY:
Yes Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Did you meet anyone?
BOY:
No Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Two other . . . (he hesitates) . . . men?
BOY:
I didn't see anyone, Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
What does he do, Mr. Godot? (Silence.) Do you hear me? #
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Well?
BOY:
He does nothing, Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
How is your brother?
BOY:
He's sick, Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Perhaps it was he came yesterday.
BOY:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
I don't know, Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
(softly). Has he a beard, Mr. Godot?
BOY:
Yes Sir.
VLADIMIR:
Fair or . . . (he hesitates) . . . or black?
BOY:
I think it's white, Sir.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Christ have mercy on us!
Silence.
BOY:
What am I to tell Mr. Godot, Sir?
VLADIMIR:
Tell him . . . (he hesitates) . . . tell him you saw me and that . . . (he hesitates) . . . that you saw
me. (Pause. Vladimir advances, the Boy recoils. Vladimir halts, the Boy halts. With sudden
violence.) You're sure you saw me, you won't come and tell me tomorrow that you never saw
me!
Silence. Vladimir makes a sudden spring forward, the Boy avoids him and exits running.
Silence. The sun sets, the moon rises. As in Act 1. Vladimir stands motionless and bowed.
Estragon wakes, takes off his boots, gets up with one in each hand and goes and puts them
down center front, then goes towards Vladimir.
ESTRAGON:
What's wrong with you?
VLADIMIR:
Nothing.
ESTRAGON:
I'm going.
VLADIMIR:
So am I.
ESTRAGON:
Was I long asleep?
VLADIMIR:
I don't know.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Where shall we go?
VLADIMIR:
Not far.
ESTRAGON:
Oh yes, let's go far away from here.
VLADIMIR:
We can't.
ESTRAGON:
Why not?
VLADIMIR:
We have to come back tomorrow.
ESTRAGON:
What for?
VLADIMIR:
To wait for Godot.
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
ESTRAGON:
Ah! (Silence.) He didn't come?
VLADIMIR:
No.
ESTRAGON:
And now it's too late.
VLADIMIR:
Yes, now it's night.
ESTRAGON:
And if we dropped him? (Pause.) If we dropped him?
VLADIMIR:
He'd punish us. (Silence. He looks at the tree.) Everything's dead but the tree.
ESTRAGON:
(looking at the tree). What is it?
VLADIMIR:
It's the tree.
ESTRAGON:
Yes, but what kind?
VLADIMIR:
I don't know. A willow.
Estragon draws Vladimir towards the tree. They stand motionless before it. Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Why don't we hang ourselves?
VLADIMIR:
With what?
ESTRAGON:
You haven't got a bit of rope?
VLADIMIR:
No.
ESTRAGON:
Then we can't.
Silence.
VLADIMIR:
Let's go.
ESTRAGON:
Wait, there's my belt.
VLADIMIR:
It's too short.
ESTRAGON:
You could hang onto my legs.
VLADIMIR:
And who'd hang onto mine?
ESTRAGON:
True.
VLADIMIR:
Show me all the same. (Estragon loosens the cord that holds up his trousers which, much too
big for him, fall about his ankles. They look at the cord.) It might do in a pinch. But is it
strong enough?
ESTRAGON:
We'll soon see. Here.
They each take an end of the cord and pull. #
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
It breaks. They almost fall.
VLADIMIR:
Not worth a curse.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
You say we have to come back tomorrow?
VLADIMIR:
Yes.
ESTRAGON:
Then we can bring a good bit of rope.
VLADIMIR:
Yes.
Silence.
ESTRAGON:
Didi?
VLADIMIR:
Yes.
ESTRAGON:
I can't go on like this.
VLADIMIR:
That's what you think.
ESTRAGON:
If we parted? That might be better for us.
VLADIMIR:
We'll hang ourselves tomorrow. (Pause.) Unless Godot comes.
ESTRAGON:
And if he comes?
VLADIMIR:
We'll be saved.
Vladimir takes off his hat (Lucky's), peers inside it, feels about inside it, shakes it, knocks on
the crown, puts it on again.
ESTRAGON:
Waiting for Godot -- Act 2
http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part2.html[4/24/2014 5:45:41 PM]
Well? Shall we go?
VLADIMIR:
Pull on your trousers.
ESTRAGON:
What?
VLADIMIR:
Pull on your trousers.
ESTRAGON:
You want me to pull off my trousers?
VLADIMIR:
Pull ON your trousers.
ESTRAGON:
(realizing his trousers are down). True.
He pulls up his trousers.
VLADIMIR:
Well? Shall we go?
ESTRAGON:
Yes, let's go.
They do not move.
Curtain.
Top Act 1
Director (D).
His female assistant (A).
Protagonist (P).
Luke, in charge of the lighting, offstage (L).
Rehearsal. Final touches to the last scene. Bare stage. A and L have just set the lighting. D has just arrived.
D in an armchair downstage audience left. Fur coat. Fur toque to match. Age and physique unimportant.
A standing beside him. White overall. Bare head. Pencil on ear. Age and physique unimportant.
P midstage standing on a black block 18 inches high. Black wide-brimmed hat. Black dressing-gown to ankles. Barefoot. Head bowed. Hands in pockets. Age and physique unimportant.
D and A contemplate P. Long pause.
A
(Finally.) Like the look of him?
D
So so. (Pause.) Why the plinth?
A
To let the stalls see the feet.
Pause.
D
Why the hat?
A
To help hide the face.
Pause.
D
Why the gown?
A
To have him all black.
Pause.
D
What has he on underneath? (A moves towards P.) Say it. (A halts.)
144
A
His night attire.
D
Colour?
A
Ash.
D takes out a cigar.
D
Light. (A returns, lights the cigar, stands still. D smokes.)
How's the skull?
A
You've seen it.
D
I forget. (A moves towards P.) Say it.
A halts.
A
Moulting. A few tufts.
D
Colour?
A
Ash.
Pause.
D
Why hands in pockets?
A
To help have him all black.
D
They mustn't.
A
I make a note. (She takes out a pad, takes pencil, notes.)
Hands exposed.
She puts back pad and pencil.
D
How are they? (A at a loss. Irritably.) The hands, how are the hands?
A
You've seen them.
D
I forget.
A
Crippled. Fibrous degeneration.
D
Clawlike?
A
If you like.
D
Two claws?
A
Unless he clench his fists.
D
He mustn't.
A
I make a note. (She takes out pad, takes pencil, notes.) Hands limp.
She puts back pad and pencil.
D
Light. (A returns, relights the cigar, stands still. D smokes.) Good. Now let's have a look. (A at a loss. Irritably.) Get going. Lose that gown. (He consults his chronometer.) Step on it, I have a caucus.
145
A goes to P, takes off the gown. P submits, inert. A steps back, the gown over her arm. P in old grey pyjamas, head bowed, fists clenched. Pause.
A
Like him better without? (Pause.) He's shivering.
D
Not all that. Hat.
A advances, takes off hat, steps back, hat in hand. Pause.
A
Like that cranium?
D
Needs whitening.
A
I make a note. (She takes out pad, takes pencil, notes.) Whiten cranium.
She puts back pad and pencil.
D
The hands. (A at a loss. Irritably.) The fists. Get going. (A advances, unclenches fists, steps back.) And whiten.
A
I make a note. (She takes out pad, takes pencil, notes.) Whiten hands.
She puts back pad and pencil. They contemplate P.
D
(Finally.) Something wrong. (Distraught.) What is it?
A
(Timidly.) What if we were… were to… join them?
D
No harm trying. (A advances, joins the hands, steps back.) Higher. (A advances, raises waist-high the joined hands, steps back.) A touch more. (A advances, raises breast-high the joined hands.) Stop! (A steps back.) Better. It's coming. Light.
A returns, relights cigar, stands still. D smokes.
A
He's shivering.
D
Bless his heart.
Pause.
A
(Timidly.) What about a little… a little… gag?
D
For God's sake! This craze for explicitation! Every i dotted to death! Little gag! For God's sake!
A
Sure he won't utter?
D
Not a squeak. (He consults his chronometer.) Just time. I'll go and see how it looks from the house.
Exit D, not to appear again. A subsides in the armchair, springs to her feet no sooner seated, takes out a rag, wipes vigorously back and seat of chair, discards rag, sits again. Pause.
146
D
(Off, plaintive.) I can't see the toes. (Irritably.) I'm sitting in the front row of the stalls and can't see the toes.
A
(Rising.) I make a note. (She takes out a pad, takes pencil, notes.) Raise pedestal.
D
There's a trace of face.
A
I make a note.
She takes out pad, takes pencil, makes to note.
D
Down the head. (A at a loss. Irritably.) Get going. Down his head. (A puts back pad and pencil, goes to P, bows his head further, steps back.) A shade more. (A advances, bows the head further.) Stop! (A steps back.) Fine. It's coming. (Pause.) Could do with more nudity.
A
I make a note.
She takes out pad, makes to take her pencil.
D
Get going! Get going! (A puts back the pad, goes to P, stands irresolute.) Bare the neck. (A undoes top buttons, parts the flaps, steps back.) The legs. The shins. (A advances, rolls up to below knee one trouser-leg, steps back.) The other. (Same for other leg, steps back.) Higher. The knees. (A advances, rolls up to above knees both trouser-legs, steps back.) And whiten.
A
I make a note. (She takes out pad, takes pencil, notes.) Whiten all flesh.
D
It's coming. Is Luke around?
A
(Calling.) Luke! (Pause. Louder.) Luke!
L
(Off, distant.) I hear you. (Pause. Nearer.) What's the trouble now?
A
Luke's around.
D
Blackout stage.
L
What?
A transmits in technical terms. Fade-out of general light. Light on P alone. A in shadow.
D
Just the head.
L
What?
A transmits in technical terms. Fade-out of light on P's body. Light on head alone. Long pause.
147
D
Lovely.
Pause.
A
(Timidly.) What if he were to… were to… raise his head… an instant… show his face… just an instant.
D
For God's sake! What next? Raise his head? Where do you think we are? In Patagonia? Raise his head? For God's sake! (Pause.) Good. There's our catastrophe. In the bag. Once more and I'm off.
A
(To L.) Once more and he's off.
Fade-up of light on P's body. Pause. Fade-up of general light.
D
Stop! (Pause.) Now… let 'em have it. (Fade-out of general light. Pause. Fade-out of light on body. Light on head alone. Long pause.) Terrific! He'll have them on their feet. I can hear it from here.
Pause. Distant storm of applause. P raises his head, fixes the audience. The applause falters, dies. Long pause. Fade-out of light on face.
Sitting centre side by side stage right to left Flo, Vi and Ru. Very erect, facing front, hands clasped in laps.
Silence.
Vi
Ru.
Ru
Yes.
Vi
Flo.
Flo
Yes.
Vi
When did we three last meet?
Ru
Let us not speak.
Silence.
Exit Vi right.
Silence.
Flo
Ru.
Ru
Yes.
Flo
What do you think of Vi?
Ru
I see little change. (Flo moves to centre seat, whispers in Ru's ear. Appalled.) Oh! (They look at each other. Flo puts her finger to her lips.) Does she not realise?
Flo
God grant not.
Enter Vi. Flo and Ru turn back front, resume pose. Vi sits right.
Silence.
Just sit together as we used to, in the playground at Miss Wade's.
Ru
On the log.
Silence.
Exit Flo left.
Silence.
Vi.
Vi
Yes.
Ru
How do you find Flo?
Vi
She seems much the same. (Ru moves to centre seat, whispers in Vi'S ear. Appalled.) Oh! (They look at each other. Ru puts her finger to her lips.) Has she not been told?
Ru
God forbid.
Enter Flo. Ru and Vi turn back front, resume pose. Flo sits left.
Holding hands… that way.
Flo
Dreaming of… love.
Silence.
Exit Ru right.
Silence.
Vi
Flo.
Flo
Yes.
Vi
How do you think Ru is looking?
Flo
One sees little in this light. (Vi moves to centre seat, whispers in Flo's ear. Appalled.) Oh! (They look at each other. Vi puts her finger to her lips.) Does she not know?
Vi
Please God not.
Enter Ru. Vi and Flo turn back front, resume pose. Ru sits right.
Silence.
May we not speak of the old days? (Silence.) Of what came after? (Silence.) Shall we hold hands in the old way?
After a moment they join hands as follows: Vi's right hand with Ru's right hand. Vi's left hand with Flo's left hand, Flo's right hand with Ru's left hand, VI'S arms being above Ru's left arm and Flo's right arm. The three pairs of clasped hands rest on the three laps.
Silence.
Flo
I can feel the rings.
Silence.
CURTAIN
Animal noises. Slowly merging with the sound of a crowd, cooing and laughing. Lights fade up on the empty stage.
Ivan
(off) I mean, what is the world coming to!? Genuinely!
Ivan, in a tweed hacking jacket, enters mid-flow, declaiming to a seemingly imaginary audience. He is followed by Zack.
When this is the cultural sensation of the age? When this garbage is what passes for entertainment? Some caged cretins napping and pooing! I mean, what are these people doing here? What are they expecting these animals to actually do?
Zack
They're not expecting anything, Ivan, they've just not seen them before –
Ivan
Oh, this is the end of days! You mark my words. This year will go down in history as the very nadir of human civilisation –
Zack
You said that last year as well –
Ivan
And we've got worse, haven't we? We've fallen further and fouler! You know why that Darwin bloke worked out we came from these fluffy fucks? You know why that's happening now? Because we're turning back in to them, mate. We're devolving. Pretty soon we'll grow fur and tails and beaks and scales and waddle into the sea and turn back into shells.
Zack
Yup. Did you actually read Darwin's book?
Ivan
I, yes, I read the back.
Zack
Okay, well, either way, please don't get angry with me about it –
10
Ivan
I'm not angry with you, Zack, I'm angry in general. I'm an artist. That's my job.
Zack
I, is it –?
Ivan
I'm angry that the masses lap up this crap! I'm angry about how much it cost to get in here. And, to be honest… I'm still angry that all my friends go out for dinner last night and don't think to invite me!
Zack
Oh my God, Ivan, please…
Ivan
I mean, how can that happen?!
Zack
It was an accident –
Ivan
I felt like a goon!
Zack
I know, I'm sorry –
Ivan
An absolute bloody goon! Plodding past the window with Nikolai Dudin, seeing you, Anne, Pav, Sonya, Andrei polishing off dessert, and Nikolai's like 'Aren't those your friends, Ivan?' and I'm like 'Er… yes, Nikolai, they are –'
Zack
We couldn't get hold of you –
Ivan
Horseshit!
Zack
You weren't at home –
Ivan
I'm an actor, Zack, I am always at home!
Zack
It… okay, look, Ivan… there was a reason you weren't at dinner, that, we… we wanted to –
Ivan
Do you know what I ate last night?
Zack
Well, no, clearly not –
Ivan
Cheese and turnip.
Zack
Right, that's… as in?
Ivan
Some cheese and then a turnip. It's not even a meal. It's never even been a meal.
Zack
Well, okay, you can't pin that on us –
11
Ivan
I don't like being left out. Ever!
Zack
It was, yes and I'm saying you weren't left out, per se, it was, we were talking about you, Ivan, about your shows and…
Ivan
Then you bring me here! Rub my face in this shit!
Zack
I'm not… what? Rubbing your face in what?
Ivan
This is what's stealing my bloody audience, mate! This bilge. These… (Points at the cockatiel.) lightweight prats. It's a knife in the nuts bringing me here, it really is…
Zack
Okay, well I didn't know that, Ivan. I didn't know you were in competition with animals now –
Ivan
I'm in competition with everything, man! And whether I like it or not, and I don't, this the future of showbiz. Right here. Dancing dogs, weird fish, cross-eyed cats. This'll be the only toss in town before too long, I kid you not. Survival of the bloody blandest. That's what they want…
Zack
I'm sorry you don't like it here, Ivan, I had no idea that zoos make you angry now as well. We can go and get a coffee once Anya gets here if you'd rather do that.
Beat. Ivan calms down a bit.
Ivan
What about my shows? You said you were talking about my shows. At dinner. What about them?
Zack
Yes. And this is, I don't want to talk about it while you're… het up –
Ivan
I'm not. I've het down now. What were you saying about them?
Zack
Yeah, okay, look, it wasn't just that we couldn't get hold of you last night, it was more that… we didn't. The truth is Ivan, we, not just me, Pavel, Anya, a few of us, thought we should talk about you and… your work and, first up, you should know, we all think you're amazingly resilient, how you've kept plugging away all these years despite uh, everything –
12
Ivan
Uh-huh –
Zack
But the thing is, we, not just me, felt that it had got to the point where we had to… say something.
Ivan nods. Beat. A little smile.
Ivan
You don't…
Zack
Well… really?
Ivan
I don't do it for praise, Zack.
Zack
Oh. No, what?
Ivan
I'm just a guy.
Zack
Yes, I know, sorry, I mean it's not that, it's more the, the other –
Ivan
Say no more…
Zack
No, I, I think I have to –
Ivan
You'll embarrass me –
Zack
We think you should stop, Ivan. With the shows. We think it's time you… didn't do them. That was the… what we were talking about.
Long beat.
Ivan
Okay, well, one, no. And two, what?
Zack
We know you've been finding it tough, money-wise, and –
Ivan
The work is its own reward.
Zack
Okay. But it's not though, is it?
You're eating cheese and turnip –
Ivan
Yeah, by choice. I like cheese and turnip.
Zack
Okay. That wasn't the impression you gave me just now –
Ivan
Yes, it was.
13
Zack
But, look, that's not the – we think it's maybe… bad for you –
Ivan
The turnip isn't –
Zack
No, not –
Ivan
Keeps me regular –
Zack
The work, Ivan. You have to admit, you've become a lot more bitter recently. About people younger than you, people getting more attention than you, about circuses, zoos now, you sound, well… paranoid.
Ivan
Has Anne been saying this?
Zack
Anya, all of us are worried about you, Ivan, yes. That's all this is.
Ivan
Well… okay, don't. Don't worry –
Zack
And there comes a point where you have to accept that you gave it a good old go, but it's just not going to happen for you. And that's fine. Giving up is also, sometimes, very brave.
Ivan
Yeah, look, Zack, I know I'm hard-up and tired and, yes, okay, intense, at times. I'm not buoyant, like you. I'm complicated. And you're more, not simple but… simpler –
Zack
Okay, great –
Ivan
We're fundamentally different creatures. Is what I'm saying. I'm a lion, and you're a, you know, a cow. They're both equally good, they're just different –
Zack
Lions are clearly better –
Ivan
And when you're a lion, as I am, you've got to follow your nature.
You can't just join the herd and grow udders and chew the cud –
Zack
I don't know what this is meant to mean –
Ivan
It wouldn't work. Everyone'd be like, 'Why is there a lion on the, on your farm?' And the farmer'd be all, 'Is it14definitely a lion?' and the, this passer-by figure'd be going, 'Yes, clearly it is, it's roaring and yellow and has talent and things to say –'
Zack
I think you should abandon this metaphor now, Ivan –
Ivan
I'm not giving up, Zack! I need to perform! Regardless of what's best for me, I just must.
Zack
Yes, and Anya felt like that at first, but then she started with the cushions and –
Ivan
I have a duty though! To the people –
Zack
Well… very few people –
Ivan
And to the truth. And to the justice. To expose what's really going on in this country.
Zack
Yes but, are you confident you actually… know what that is?
Ivan
Very.
Zack
But I mean… should you be?
Ivan
The arsehole Tsar is selling Russia down the river! I cannot and will not stop until I have brought that tyrant to his bloody knees!
Zack
I know, Ivan, you've been saying this since college –
Ivan
Yeah, right, because nothing's changed, has it?
Zack
Well no, of course it has, he's freed the serfs for one thing –
Ivan
Oh, open your eyes, boy! They've not been freed, they've just been released into the free-market feast. Tossed into the jaws of the flesh-eating foreign fat cats. I swear, Zack, when I think about what that man's done to the serfs it makes me physically vomit.
Zack
But you… why though, Ivan? You don't know any serfs –
Ivan
I know serfs, lad! Don't you worry about that. I've met three of them!
15
Zack
You live in the city. And you hang out in cafés, wearing that bloody English hunting jacket!
Ivan
It's a hacking jacket.
Zack
Moaning about the evil tax-dodging foreign bastards, while blithely buying up their stuff…
Ivan
This was a present from my father –
Zack
Which you asked for –
Ivan
Which I, this is a very well-made piece of clothes!
Zack
But you must see the hypocrisy of it, Ivan… you must see that…
Beat.
Ivan
Do you actually believe in me, Zack? In my work?
Zack
I… if it's not changing anything, if you're not getting anywhere, if the audience for the last one was made up of me, Anya, and that man with the dog, then why… don't keep doing it! Don't keep getting cross with the public because they'd rather watch a bear balancing on a ball than a grown man pretending to be a potato –
Ivan
I wasn't pretending to be a potato! Thank you. I was portraying the famine in Northern India from the point of view of the crops – it was highly theatrical. And I'm not cross with the public, I'm cross with the famine. I'm cross it happened –
Zack
You're cross that you're not famous, Ivan. Be honest. Aren't you?
Ivan
No, I… fame is a curse and I've actively tried to avoid it.
Zack
Well, congratulations, you've certainly managed that –
Ivan
They don't want me to be famous, Zack. Because I confront things. Because I'm dangerous. Because I have integrity. You may have heard of it. Even in the legal world…
Beat. Zack turns away frustrated.
16
And don't describe Mr Poborsky as 'that man with the dog', please –
Zack
He has got a dog –
Ivan
You're trying to run down my fan! Make him sound like a vagrant –
Zack
How am I meant to describe him then? I don't know his name –
Ivan
Well… 'the retired headmaster'.
Zack
I don't know that either –
Ivan
Or maybe 'the distinguished-looking gentleman with the limps'.
Zack
Okay, fine! I didn't mean to… sorry, limps? He's got limps, plural?
Ivan
Yes. One in each leg. Hence why I often delay the start of the show while he's dealing with the stairs.
Zack
Okay. And do you think that maybe… do you think about that?
Ivan
About what?
Zack
The fact that, and I don't mean to be blunt, Ivan, that after eight years doing shows, your audience has more limps than paying punters.
Ivan
Do you believe in me, Zack? Cutting to the crap for a sec: do you, my best friend, believe in what I do?
Zack
I… Ivan, that's not the –
Ivan
Do you actually like it?
Beat.
Zack
Yes, I…
Ivan clutches Zack's shoulder. And smiles at him.
Ivan
Alright then.
17
Zack
The early stuff with Anya, the song-and-dance stuff, was good, but, you know, it's different now, you're not getting any younger –
Ivan
I feel like I am actually… I am full to the brim of beans –
Ivan starts doing some dance steps.
Zack
Everyone's settling down now. Pav and Sonya are having a baby, Andrei's moving out of the city, you're not twenty-five any more, you can't keep doing this, on your own, to a handful of people, slumming it in a tiny flat, into your forties, it's not healthy, Ivan, it's not workable…
Ivan
Mm. They were good, weren't they?
Zack
What… what's that?
Ivan
The shows with Anne.
Zack
Oh, yeah, they were great. That wasn't my point though, per se –
Ivan
I've still got the maracas somewhere. Do you think she would – ?
Zack
No. Ivan.
Ivan
Because you're right, I shouldn't be doing this on my own –
Zack
Anya makes cushions now –
Ivan
Yeah, I mean, we can fit it in around the cushions, Zack, you can move cushions around, famously –
Zack
She's moved on.
Ivan
You never really move on –
Zack
She has, she's –
Ivan
She can relearn the songs –
Zack
We're getting married.
Ivan starts busting out a few dance moves. And sings.
18
Ivan
'Don't fear, my dear, the war in the Crimea. We're sending you some cheer and beer and gear from over 'ere…' You're getting married?
Ivan stops. A bit floored by this.
Zack
Yes. I've not actually asked her yet, but, that's, you know, where we're at, where Anya's at. We're settling down. She needs settling. I've been meaning to tell you. To check you were, well not check, but just to more, let you know, make sure you were cool with it.
Ivan
Why would I not be cool with it?
Zack
No, I, exactly, that's why I –
Ivan
I think it's great! This is… yes!
Hugs Zack.
I am uber-cool with it! This is just good honest… stuff!
Zack
Thank you. Yeah. Just cos Stefan Maksimushkin said –
Ivan
Stefan Maksimushkin is full of shit! Whatever it was. What was it?
Zack
No, he just, he said you said to him that you thought one day you and Anya would get back together –
Ivan
That's, no, I didn't say that. And I wouldn't want that. I would actively hate that in fact –
Zack
No, good –
Ivan
And not because, don't get me wrong, Anne's lovely, I just –
Zack
It's fine –
Ivan
She can be extremely –
Zack
Well, you don't have to –
Ivan
Annoying. As I'm sure you now know, but that's not, I'm saying, Stefan Maksimushkin hasn't got any front teeth.
Zack
What's that got to do with it?
19
Ivan
No, nothing, I just also remembered that about him.
Zack
And he has got front teeth, they're just replacements –
Ivan
They're fake. You shouldn't trust someone who lies about his teeth.
Zack
He's not lying, they were knocked out –
Ivan
Sure. All I know is, I'm very pleased, if not relieved that you're marrying Anne, because a) that's one less thing for me to worry about –
Zack
What does that mean?
Ivan
And b) thinking about it, she's been out of the game for so long now, that getting her gig-fit would take a hell of a lot of work which frankly I don't have. And time. I meant.
Zack
Okay. Great.
Ivan
Have you got the ring?
Zack finds the ring box in his pocket and passes it to Ivan.
Zack
Oh yeah, it's… don't say anything, okay? When she gets here –
Ivan
Yeah, yeah, obviously…
Opens it.
Ahhhhh. Sweet.
Zack
It's nice isn't it?
Ivan
Lovely. That's… all as I would say, Zack, and feel free to ignore this, is I don't think it's very 'Anya'. Do you know what I mean?
He hands it back to him. Zack stares at him.
Zack
What are you… why would say that?
Ivan
Just being honest, mate. As per.
Zack stares at it again. The crocodile owner, Mr Popov, in a flat cap, enters, shouting very loud.
20
Mr Popov
OI!
They spin round. Beat.
Zack
Yes? Why are you shouting, we're just here –?
Mr Popov
You haven't paid. Seven roubles.
Zack takes two tickets out of his pocket.
Zack
No, we, here are our tickets, look –
Mr Popov
They're the wrong ones. Seven roubles.
Ivan
You're not even looking at them –
Mr Popov
I know from the colour. Seven roubles.
Ivan
Stop saying seven roubles.
Zack
These are the ones we were given at the front –
Mr Popov
You can't buy tickets for this bit at the front. It's separate.
Ivan
What? It can't be –
Mr Popov
Hence the tinsel.
He points at the bit of tinsel by the edge of the stage.
Ivan
'Hence the tinsel'? What the hell does that mean?
Mr Popov
Separating this bit out.
Ivan
You can't use tinsel for that.
Mr Popov
I couldn't get a velvet rope.
Ivan
You can't just sub in tinsel! You may as well use a string of sausages.
Mr Popov
Seven roubles.
Ivan
Yes, we know that! You've more than made that clear. And we've already bought tickets for the whole zoo, so we're not paying again.
Zack
Alright, Ivan, it's fine –
Ivan
And frankly, seven roubles just for this bit, is an outrage.
21
Mr Popov
The other one says it's fine.
Ivan
Well, the other one's wrong! The whole zoo's only, how much was it?
Zack
Fifteen roubles.
Mr Popov
I've got a crocodile.
Ivan
Yeah but, have you?
Turns and sees it.
Oh yeah.
Mr Popov
That's got to be worth five on its own.
Ivan
Well… why?
Mr Popov
Because… the size.
Ivan
No, you see, you don't work out the entrance fee of a zoo by the size of the animals. Otherwise they'd all just be full of like… oxen.
Mr Popov
What? You're thinking of a ranch.
Ivan
No, I'm not. Don't you tell me what I'm thinking of, fish-face!
Zack
Let's just pay him, Ivan –
Mr Popov
Yes, exactly –
Ivan
No. No, sir! These people are charlatans, Zack, they have no idea about stagecraft, audiences, pricing, we are not paying again –
Zack
It's my money –
Ivan
He's probably just some con artist going round tinselling things off and claiming they're his!
Mr Popov
I rent my own section of zoo!
Ivan
Yeah, and I'm saying, I've never heard of that happening before. We shall not blindly hand over money like idiots, okay? We're not tourists.
22
Mr Popov
You've looked at my animals now –
Zack
Not much, to be honest –
Ivan
They're not your animals! Animal ownership, as a concept, is piracy –
Zack
Well, okay, don't start on that again –
Ivan
You don't own them. You've just kidnapped them and claimed they're yours in order to make a profit.
Mr Popov
I've got a crocodile.
Ivan
No, you see, you haven't. A crocodile is a naturally occurring thing, you can't own it. Or charge for it. That's like charging people to look at… the moon.
Zack
It really isn't –
Ivan
In principle it is –
Mr Popov
Have you ever transported a crocodile, mate?
Ivan
I mean… I'm not answering that –
Mr Popov
So no then.
Zack
Clearly not –
Mr Popov
So come back to me when you have –
Ivan
No. I won't. I'm not doing that –
Mr Popov
Because I'll tell you now, it's extremely bloody difficult.
Ivan
So don't do it then! Leave it where it is! It doesn't want to be here, does it?
Mr Popov
Seven roubles.
Zack takes out his money.
Ivan
Put your money away, Zack! I swear on Christ's Cross that this numpty shall not get a kopeck out of us.
Zack
It's only fourteen roubles, Ivan.
23
Ivan
Yeah, and that's… do you know how much my last show was? Eight. It was eight roubles. For an hour.
Mr Popov
Well, that's more. This is only seven.
Ivan
I know it's more! I wrote and performed a savagely satirical reconstruction of the Second Schleswig War, on my own, of course it was more.
Mr Popov
What? How did you do a whole war on your own.
Ivan
Yes, well, it was heavily stylised.
Zack
He wore lots of different hats.
Ivan
There were hats, yes –
Mr Popov
It sounds awful –
Ivan
My point is, it was not awful, it was extremely harrowing. And far more relevant than a silent reptile so… we are not paying. End of.
Mr Popov
I'm going to get Mr Frampton.
Ivan
Do it. Get Frampton. I'll happily say the same thing to Frampton.
Zack
Who's that?
Mr Popov
The English guy who owns this place –
Ivan
Of course!
Mr Popov
Wait here.
Mr Popov leaves. Zack takes out the ring again.
Ivan
See what I mean? English! These capitalist colonisers want to buy up the bloody lot…!
Zack
How is it not very Anya?
Ivan
Huh? It's just a bit… baroque.
Zack
What? What does that mean?
Anya enters. And rushes over to Ivan.
24
Anya
Oh, here you are!
Zack spins away, hiding the ring box.
Ivan
Annie! You made it!
Anya
Can I just say, I am so sorry about last night, Ivan! If it's any consolation, the chicken thing I had was, wasn't it, Zack, very stiff and you didn't miss very much at all, other than Andrei boring us to death with his bloody, whatever it's called, gangrene.
Zack
I said. What we said. I told him.
Anya
Right. And, it's only because we love you, Ivan, that's the only reason we're saying any of this.
Ivan
I know.
Anya
We all love your shows so much –
Zack
Well, Anya, hang on –
Anya
It's entirely about your welfare and, Zack explained about your flat –
Ivan
What about it?
Anya
That you urinate in the sink, Ivan, I mean…
Ivan
So? I have a bathroom, that's just, that's not because of the flat –
Zack
It's more of a lifestyle thing –
Ivan
Why are you telling her that?
Zack
It came up.
Anya
You can't go on like this…
Ivan
It's by the bed, it's a good height –
Anya
I know more than anyone that it's a hard life to give up, Ivan. Before I found cushions I never thought I could love anything else –
Ivan
And the cushions are great, Anne –
25
Zack
They really are. We all love the cushions. And they're selling, aren't they?
Anya
My family have bought some, yes, Zack's bought a few, and I am just a lot happier now, Ivan, look at me, and I would love you to find something you could get in to… be it clocks or jams or whittling –
Ivan
I'm an artist, Annie. You know me. Artist is all I can do.
Anya takes his hand and smiles at him. Zack bristles.
Anya
Oh, Ivan…
Zack
You used to work in a shoe shop. You could do that –
Ivan
I was shit at it though. At shoes.
Zack
How can you be shit at shoes?
Ivan
Well, napping, et cetera, bad, you know, lacing and… manners.
Anya notices the crocodile behind him and screams.
Anya
Ahh! What is that? What the hot fuck is that?
Ivan pulls her in for a hug.
Ivan
It's okay!
Zack
Oh, yes, it's a crocodile.
Ivan
I've got you… you're safe.
Zack
It's a river-dwelling African reptile.
Anya gets away from Ivan and has a look at it.
Anya
Oh my God, it's extraordinary!
Zack
It, yes, I suppose it is.
Ivan
It's fine.
Anya
Look at its mouth…!
Ivan
It's got a big mouth, sure. So what? It doesn't mean anything, it's not, you know, moving.
26
Anya
Well, it can't really, can it? In that little pit. That is my one beef with this place actually, it's so cramped. Some of the snakes back there are in, honestly, tubes –
Zack
I'm sure's he's okay.
Ivan
Well, they only care about profits, Anne, that's why. These zoos are run by total sharks, and to be clear, I do mean people. Saving space, cutting corners, bollocks to how bored the beasts are.
Anya
Oh, it's awful. He's catatonic, look –
Zack
I think that's just his vibe.
Ivan
He's as sad as sin, man! Look at him –
Anya
He really is, Zack. He looks dead –
Zack
That's how they hunt –
Ivan
He's dead! I bet he's dead. I bet that crook's popped in a dead one –
Zack
He's not dead.
Anya
He hasn't blinked for ages.
Ivan
Aha!
Zack
Again, I think that's what they do. I think crocodiles don't blink.
Ivan
Oh right, crocodiles don't blink! What next, tigers don't… shit?
Zack
Well no, I think they do –
Anya
He's got glass eyes.
Ivan
He's stuffed! It's a stuffy!
Zack
It's not stuffed. It's just still –
Anya
Too still.
Ivan leans in.
Ivan
Oi, Croccy! Are you dead or what?
27
Zack
Ivan, stop it…
Ivan
(sings) Croccy, are you dead? Croccy, Croccy, are you dead?
Anya is enjoying this. Ivan plays up to it.
Anya
Oh, Ivan, really…
Zack
Don't waggle your hands at it!
Ivan lifts his legs into the pit. Anya's laughing.
Ivan
Watch this, Anne! Want a nibble of my brogues then, you dead dickhead?
Anya
Oh my God, you're mad!
Zack
Ivan, stop it, seriously –
Ivan
It's not real, Zack! It looks totally fake when you actually get close to the –
There is a blood-curdling roar as the crocodile's mouth swings open and he swallows Ivan whole. Lights flicker. Ivan screams. As do Anya and Zack, leaping away from the pit.
Ah!!!! Help! Help me!
Zack runs over and grabs his hands.
Anya
Pull him out!
Zack
I know, I'm trying, I'm trying!
Anya runs to the side of the stage.
Anya
Help!!! Someone, help!!!
And back to Ivan. Ivan lets go of Zack and tries to hold open the crocodile's jaws. He slowly sinks inside, yelling.
Zack
Oh God! IVAN!!!
Zack runs out. Ivan's face is still visible in the jaws.
Anya
Shimmy out, Ivan!
Ivan
What!!?
28
Anya
Try and shimmy out!
Zack
(off) Help!! Quickly!! The crocodile's eating someone!!
Ivan's face appears in the mouth again.
Ivan
I'm too young to die, Anne!!
Anya
You are not going to die –!
Zack
(off) HELP!!!
Ivan
Oh God, oh Jesus, save me… come down and save me, I… Anne…
Anya
We're going to get you out of there, just… hold on…
Ivan
…I love you…
Anya
What?
Ivan's face sinks into the crocodile again with a scream. Zack runs back into the room. Followed by Popov, yelling.
Mr Popov
What's all this bloody wailing about? What's going on?
Anya
You have to help us –!
Mr Popov
Where's she come from? Seven roubles.
Zack
Our friend's in the crocodile. It just swallowed him.
Anya
He's still alive –
Mr Popov
What? What the bloody hell –?
Zack
The other guy… he's in there.
Mr Popov
Prove it.
Zack
I… what? We just saw it happen.
Mr Popov
You just don't want to pay his seven roubles.
Ivan 's face appears in the crocodile's mouth again.
Ivan
Slice it open! I… ahh!
He slides back down again.
29
Mr Popov
What's he doing! Get out of there!
Zack
The crocodile swallowed him.
Anya
Slice it open!
Mr Popov
Swallowed him how? He's in a pit.
Anya
Slice it!
Zack
He, yes, I know, he put his legs in because he thought it was dead –
Mr Popov
It's not dead.
Zack
No, we know that now –
Anya
Slice it! Slice it open!
Mr Popov
Eff off. It cost me nineteen thousand roubles.
Zack
You'll get it back –
Mr Popov
Plus the transportation costs. That was a total hose-down –
Zack
You'll get it all back –
Mr Popov
Well, you say that, you've still not paid the seven roubles.
Anya
We're not negotiating! Our friend has been eaten by your animal. If he dies in there, you will be in deep shit –
Mr Popov
Oh, you're threatening me now –?
Anya
This man works at the law courts!
Zack
As a clerk –
Anya
And he knows about this stuff –
Zack
Not this exact stuff but, yes, you'll be in some trouble I expect –
Mr Popov
It's his fault for putting his stupid legs in the pit…
Anya
You can't blame customers for getting swallowed by your animals. That's your fault for not tethering them properly, isn't it, Zack?
30
Zack
Again, this really isn't my field –
Mr Popov
And he wasn't a customer, he hadn't paid. He was trespassing.
Anya
Listen here, you weirdo, you have to get him out, okay? Now! This man is a… significant performance artist!
Zack
Well, that's not –
Anya
And he comes from a good family, who will reward you thoroughly –
Zack
And he's a human being, is the main thing, so, you know, you have to!
Mr Popov
Oh, right, so the crocodile's just got to get knifed, has it?
Zack
Yes. Obviously.
Mr Popov
To bail out that prick.
Anya
Don't you call him a prick!
Zack
But yes, that's the idea.
Mr Popov
Well, no, sorry, not happening. That's my livelihood your mate's just got in, and I'm not going to start cutting it up for his sake. Now. Seven roubles times three is twenty-one.
Anya
Times three? We're not paying for the one inside the crocodile –
Mr Popov
Alright, fourteen then.
Anya
We're not paying at all! He's going to bloody die in a minute… Zack!
Zack
What? What can I…?
Anya
I think you have to climb in there.
Mr Popov
Do not climb in there!
Zack
And then what?
Anya
And then… take steps.
31
Mr Popov
Right. I'm getting Mr Frampton. I mean it this time.
Popov exits. Zack walks over to the pit.
Anya
Quickly, Zack!!
Zack
I know, Anya! I know quickly!
Anya
Open its mouth and fish Ivan out.
Zack
Are you out of your mind? I'm not prising open a crocodile's mouth –
Anya
I'll lend you my gloves –
Zack
He'll bloody eat me.
Anya
He may now be full –
Zack
I said he shouldn't start dicking about near its face, I said that, and he didn't listen –
Anya
So it serves him right, does it?
Zack
Well, it doesn't serve him wrong.
Anya
Your best friend's being eaten and you're going to just do nothing?
Zack
Well, what are you going to do? You went out with him for four years, you've got just as much right to get in and pull him out.
Anya
Oh, you want me to get eaten by a crocodile as well?
Zack
I want… no, I don't want that, I, in an ideal world, no one would get eaten by a crocodile!
Anya
Well they have.
Zack
And he's probably dead now anyway –
Ivan/Crocodile
I'm not dead!!!
They turn and run back to the edge of the pit.
Anya
Ivan! Are you okay in there?
Ivan/Crocodile
I think I'm lodged!!!
32
Anya
Oh, thank God. Can you hold on for a while, do you think?
Ivan/Crocodile
Maybe, I… I don't want to die…!
Anya
Are there enzymes in there, Ivan?
Ivan/Crocodile
What?
Anya
Are there enzymes trying to break you down…?
Ivan/Crocodile
I don't know. If there are, they've not managed it yet! Thank God for the hacking jacket! Zack?
Zack
Yes. I heard you. We're going to get you out of there, Ivan.
Ivan/Crocodile
Quickly… it's all dark and smelly!
Anya
Can you open his mouth from the inside, Ivan…?
Ivan/Crocodile
I don't think so. My arms are stuck so I'd have to do it with my face, which is obviously a bit risky. From an acting point of view.
Anya
Yes, of course.
Ivan/Crocodile
And overall safety point of view. Please just get a person!!
Zack
Yes we will, Ivan, we'll… I'll go to the police –
Anya
I'll go to the press.
Zack
What? No –
Anya
Ivan's been eaten alive, this is a huge story, Zack –
Zack
Get a vet! He needs a vet, not the bloody press…
Ivan/Crocodile
Arrrgggg…!!!
Zack
Just hold on, Ivan…
As Ivan screams, the crocodile opens its mouth and the scream becomes a loud roar. Zack and Anya run out of the room in different directions. We follow Zack straight into…
In the darkness, we hear:
Semyon
Masha
Masha
Are you asleep?
There is a sharp intake of breath as Masha starts into wakefulness.
Masha
What?
Semyon
Shhhh it's just me
Sorry, sorry
Masha
Semyon
Masha returns to an exhausted sleep.
Semyon
Masha
Are you awake?
Masha
Semyon
Semyon
Have we got any food left?
I need some black pudding
Masha
What?
Semyon
Is there any left?
Masha
Pardon?
Semyon
Did we eat all that black pudding?
Pause.
Masha
Did you look?
4
Semyon
I thought you might just know
You served it and
I thought you might remember
Masha
You wake me
In the middle of the night
For this?
Semyon
I was just asking
Masha
Your own feet won't carry you?
Semyon
It's cold. I thought if you remembered it would save a wasted journey
Masha
How could you?
Semyon
Masha
Masha
I can't believe you've done this
Semyon
I didn't
Masha
Not even you
Semyon
I'm only hungry
Masha
Go to sleep
Semyon
Masha
Masha
Don't you dare wake me up again
She turns from him. He sighs.
Semyon
I won't
We hear them both bitterly try to settle. Pause.
Masha
You've killed me with that black pudding, Semyon. I'm not joking; you've destroyed me. I get up at five in the freezing dark. I'm at work at six every day for hour after hour after hour; a mind-numbing, gruelling slog – and when I finally fall into bed, shattered, what d'you do?
5
What d'you do, Semyon?
Are you asleep?
Semyon
(waking) What?
Masha
I was talking to you
Semyon
What did you say?
Masha
I said just because you're awake chewing the blanket, it doesn't mean I have to be. The least you could do is let me sleep
Semyon
But
Masha
But no, you wake me up to chat about black pudding
Semyon
Is there some left?
Masha
Yes, yes, there is
Yes, there's black pudding
Because you didn't eat it at teatime
Semyon
Don't start, Masha
Masha
That's why you're hungry now
Semyon
I can't stand / your nagging
Masha
Why didn't you eat when it was in front of you? My mother and I go out of our way to put food / on this table
Semyon
Yes, and that's the point; / that's the point
Masha
We put more food on your plate than / on our own
Semyon
Yes, you do, and that's the point –
You do it to humiliate me
Masha
What?
6
Semyon
No wonder I can't eat. I'm a parasite. I'm a bloodsucking leech. I haven't got a job; I bring in / no money
Masha
Now is not the time for this
Semyon
And I eat away at the family resources. You pile my plate like that to rub it in / to demean me –
Masha
Don't start, Semyon
Semyon
I've got eyes
I can feel
Masha
I can't stand / your self-pity
Semyon
You're doing it to punish me. You're killing me with / generosity
Masha
I'm killing you?
Semyon
That food's like ashes in my mouth. And in the middle of the night when I'm lying in bed starving to death – just the two of us under one blanket and no one to witness – you crucify me with black pudding
Masha
I crucify you with black pudding?
Semyon
In your own way, yes
Masha
Well I'm sorry. (She is getting out of bed.) Let it never be said that I crucified my man with black pudding. I'll get you some now. You eat your fill. Let me furnish you, Semyon
Masha lights a candle. Her young, open features would look fine if they were better fed and had more sleep. Her nightwear would keep out a polar storm.
Semyon
Can't you see what you're doing to me?
Masha holds the candlelight to his pained visage. He too is young: twenty-seven. His hair stands in tufts; he is flushed with stress. His eyes show great sensitivity.
7
Masha
God in Heaven, this is no way to live
Still, what can you do, eh?
She exits. Semyon lights a candle by the bed.
Semyon
No way to live
No way to live
He catches sight of his reflection. It appals him. He turns from the mirror.
I am a maggot, not a man
Masha returns with a half-eaten sausage of black pudding and some bread.
Masha
Right; what d'you want it with?
Cold spuds or hard bread?
Semyon
Makes no difference 'cause I'm not having any
Masha
You what?
Semyon
I wouldn't eat it if you buried me up to my neck in it
Masha
Oh for God's sake
Semyon
Look at you: eyes like a suffering beast. How can I eat food when it's served by an aching martyr?
Masha
Why do I even bother?
Semyon
You're playing all downtrodden, Masha, when we both know that you're really the man of the house. You bring home the money. It's you that wears the trousers, Masha, isn't it?
Masha
Well, I wish I was wearing 'em now 'cause it's freezing out here
Semyon
(indicating his heart) It's freezing in here, too. You'd squeeze the soul out of me and spread it on that8 bread, wouldn't you? You think that just because I'm unemployed I'm not a proper man
Masha
Do I?
Semyon
You think I have no heart, no pride
Masha
Is that what I think?
Semyon
This life is destroying me
Masha
Semyon, you're just hungry
Semyon
I fear for myself, Masha. I'm falling apart. Look what's happening to me. I've got a symptom. Look at my symptom
Semyon sits on the edge of the bed, throwing off his blankets. He crosses his legs. He hits his knee with the side of his hand. It jerks up in a reflex action.
Did you see that?
Masha
Yes
Semyon
It's a fucking symptom. That never used to happen
Masha
You might get a job in a circus with that, but it's no way to live
Semyon
What do you mean by that?
Masha
I mean we can't go on
Semyon
Well, let me set you free, Masha
Let me take myself away
Would you rather I cut my throat or hanged myself?
Masha
Oh spare me please
Semyon
'Cause that's what you're saying, isn't it?
You wish I was dead
Masha
Well, right at this moment / Semyon
9
Semyon
And why shouldn't you? You'd be better off without me
Masha
I'd be better off without your whingeing, that's for sure
Semyon
Well, I won't disappoint you
Masha
Good
Semyon
My God I won't
Semyon blows out his candle.
Masha
What are you doing?
Semyon
I always knew you were a hard-faced troll
Semyon blows Masha's candle out. She squeals. The candlestick falls from her hand and breaks. The room is completely dark.
Masha
Semyon
Semyon, where are you?
Stop this
Please, whatever I said I'm sorry
I hate the dark
Serafima, Masha's mother, appears standing in the doorway. She is lit by a shaft of moonlight; a woman of no subtlety and indefatigable physical strength.
Serafima
Masha, you know I never intrude
You know how careful I am of your private married life
But the walls are like card in here
I should think the whole building's woken to your squawking
What's going on?
Masha
Ask my husband
Serafima
Are you crying?
10
Masha
(tearfully) No
Serafima
What's up, Semyon? Let's have it
Masha
Semyon?
Serafima
Come on, lad, speak up. She's bawling
Masha
Senyechka, talk to me
Serafima
Are you a stone, Semyon?
Masha
Where are you?
Serafima
Perhaps he's had a stroke
Or a fit
Maybe his heart's packed in
Or his brain
Masha
Oh merciful God
Mother, find the candle
Serafima
Where?
Masha
I don't know; grope around on the floor
Serafima
Grope around, she says
Masha
Over there by the chair
Serafima
I'm groping, I'm groping
Masha
Semyon, please. I didn't mean anything
Serafima
What chair? Where?
Masha
Talk to me for God's sake
There's a loud crack.
Serafima
Ow!
Masha
What was that?
Serafima
The chair, Masha, my head and the chair
Masha
We have to have some light
11
Serafima
Holy merciful mother of God, here it is
Masha
Semyon, will you talk to me?
Serafima
He's hiding or something
It's his idea of a joke
Serafima lights the candle. Masha looks around, fearfully.
Masha
He isn't here. Something terrible is happening
Serafima
He's probably fallen back asleep, the big ape
Masha
(pulling back the blanket) He's gone
Serafima
Gone where? What for at this time of night?
Masha
Mother
I think he's going to top himself
Serafima
What?
Masha
He said I was crucifying him
He showed me his symptom
Serafima
He never
Masha
I said it was no way to live and he's gone
Serafima
He's going to what himself?
Masha
Top himself
Finish it
End it all
Self-murder
Serafima
Oh
Masha
Hand me my skirt
I've got to find him
This is a nightmare
Where are my shoes?
Serafima
Here are his pants
12
Masha
I don't need his pants
Serafima
His pants, Masha
Jesus be praised
Masha
What for?
Serafima
He won't go far without them. A man without pants is like a blind rat; helpless and reluctant to leave the dark. He'll be lurking around here somewhere
Masha
But the state he's in. Where can he be?
Serafima
Perhaps he's on the toilet; I don't know
Masha
He'll be drinking bleach
Serafima
We've got none
Masha
Electrics in the bath
Serafima
We haven't paid the bill; they cut us off
Masha
He'll drown himself
Masha takes the candle from Serafima. She moves through the dismal space. We see it's not a proper room at all. Part of a hallway in a once fine but now semi-derelict house has been curtained off, giving Masha and Semyon their bedroom. Serafima has the only private room on their floor.
It looks like a revolution happened in the building a decade before. It suffered serious damage that has never been repaired. What was once a bourgeois home now houses the very poorest.
Masha is making her way upstairs. We can just see the damaged staircase going up to the next landing, on which there are doors to the bathroom and Alexander's room. The rickety stairs continue up to an attic (where Yegor lives) and disappear down to the kitchen, the basement bedsits and the front door. Masha is on the upper landing. We see her trying a door and pleading.
13
Masha
Semyon, open the door. Talk to me / Semyon. Senyechka
Serafima lights another candle – under an icon of the Virgin.
Serafima
Blessed Holy Virgin, I pray for the safety of my son-in-law. Preserve him from this lunacy and bring him on his knees safe before me, where I might blacken both his eyes and break his legs to restore him to your everlasting mercy. Amen
Masha
(calling down) He's locked the door
Serafima
Has he said anything?
Masha
No. What if he's dead already?
Serafima
I'll kill him
Masha
I'm going to wake up Alexander Kalabushkin
Serafima
You can't do that
Masha
He can break the door down
Serafima
Not Alexander Kalabushkin – Masha
Masha
Why not?
Serafima
He's in deep mourning. The poor man only buried his wife last week
Masha
Then he'll understand the meaning of my pain
Serafima
I heard him through the ceiling earlier on
Moaning, roaring with grief
Masha
We need a man, Mother. It's as simple as that. I can't break that door down alone
Masha goes to Alexander's door and knocks on it. Serafima starts to make her way up the stairs. When she gets to the bathroom door, she listens at it.
14
Masha
Alexander Kalabushkin
It's me, Masha
I need a man
Comrade, I'm desperate
Alexander
(off) Take a cold bath
Masha
Help me, Alexander.
It's your strong arms I need
I have to break the door down
The door opens. Margarita appears in a pall of seedy light: a dishevelled woman, in a yellowing nightie; once beautiful, now sexy. She is one of life's survivors.
Margarita
Break the door down? You're more of a catch than I thought, Kalabushkin. There's a little trollop here who's desperate for your arms
Masha
Look, I need a strong man, all right?
Margarita
Remarkable behaviour, forcing yourself on a grieving man
Masha
Alexander, I'm in misery, please
Margarita
Here we are, innocently talking about his poor late wife – God rest her soul – when you start threatening to break down the door
Masha
Not this door – what d'you take me for? I'm a respectable married woman
Margarita
So am I, love
Alexander
Leave it, Margarita
Alexander appears. He moves like a bear, with effortless strength. His humanity is often obscured by his bad behaviour. He is pulling his braces on over his vest.
Masha
Alexander Kalabushkin
I need a man
15
Alexander
I'm happy to oblige, love, but what about your husband?
Masha
My husband has locked himself in the toilet to top himself
Margarita
To what himself?
Alexander
The stupid fool
Why didn't you say?
He barges past Margarita and approaches Serafima at the toilet door.
Serafima
Knock this door down and save that idiot boy from himself. Everyone knows how strong you are, Alexander Kalabushkin. I've seen you in your shooting gallery down at the fair, taking aim with your muscles, all taut, like a great big –
Alexander
(knocking) Come on, pal; are you all right? What're you doing in there?
Margarita
Knock it in, then
Alexander
Shh
Margarita
What are you waiting for?
Serafima
A shot
Alexander
Has he got a gun?
Serafima
I don't know
Alexander
It's just if he's got a gun, or even a knife, and I start breaking the door down, he might – (He mimes.)
Masha
I hadn't thought of that
Alexander
We have to be very careful
Masha
Should I get the police?
Margarita / Alexander
No!
16
Alexander
Why don't you say something gentle, and while he's distracted I'll – (He mimes.)
Masha
God bless you, Alexander
Alexander slowly approaches the door followed by Masha, then Serafima, then Margarita. He prepares to break down the door and then gives Masha a nod.
Masha
Darling it's me, Mashenka
I love you
Forgive me
Suddenly we hear a chain flushing. The door opens. Yegor Timoveivich comes out in his underwear, carrying a newspaper.
Yegor
Can't an innocent communist
Take a dump in the night
Without the fucking cavalry?
He creaks up the stairs to the attic; a small man in his thirties, whose hunched shoulders make him look older.
Masha
Sorry, comrade
Yegor
I love you too
Masha
(to Serafima) This is all your fault. You said he was in the toilet
Serafima
Where else could he be?
Masha
He's gone outside; I knew it
He'll be running over the wasteland
Finding a rope, slinging it over a tree –
Serafima
Not without his pants
Here, comrades, are his very pants
And no Russian male would ever hang himself without them
Margarita
Have you looked in the kitchen?
17
Masha
No
The kitchen
He'll have his head in the oven
Alexander, help me
Alexander
Come on, love
We'll find him
Margarita is following Alexander. He stops her.
Are you my shadow or what?
Alexander and Masha hurry down the stairs.
Margarita
Isn't that just like him
Drinking my comfort all night long and then
'You my shadow or what?'
It's like a compulsion with him
First one woman, then another
And all of us at arm's length
No wonder his wife croaked, the poor little bag
Serafima
Do I know you?
Margarita
No
We hear a scream from Masha and a loud thud coming from downstairs.
Serafima
He's dead
That's it
He's killed himself
Margarita
I don't believe it
Serafima
Heavenly God in your mercy pull him from the flames of hell where he surely deserves to burn, Amen
Margarita
It never stops, does it?
The train of horrible events
Only last week a customer of mine
Set his own beard on fire
18
Serafima
I feel sick
I want to do something awful
Margarita
And one night during the revolution
I was with this lad in a doorway
Celebrating the rise of the masses
When we'd finished
He kissed me
Stepped out into the street
And got his face blown off
It would have been me only I was still sorting out my hosiery
My life's like that
Man in my arms one minute – face blown off the next
Serafima
Who are you?
Margarita
Never you mind
Alexander appears. Serafima abandons Semyon's pants.
Serafima
How did he do it?
Was it gas?
Is he stiff?
Has his skin gone green?
Alexander
He wasn't there
Serafima
Where's Masha?
Alexander
Lying in a faint
Margarita
What have you done to her?
Alexander
She saw a rat licking her pots out. She screamed and hit her head on the cupboard door. She's knocked herself out
Serafima
Mother of God
(To Margarita) You look like you're useful with a rat
Come with me and we'll kill the beast
19
Margarita
All right, Grandma. I can see I'm not needed here
Margarita passes Alexander with a bitter look and follows Serafima. A grey dawn is beginning to come through the dirty skylight, casting gloomy light on the stairs. Alexander sits on them. He lights a cigarette.
Alexander
Who'd blame anyone for ending it all?
We are all worthless dogs
Semyon crawls out from under the bed. He pulls newspaper plugs out of his ears. He goes to the table and picks up the sausage of black pudding. He puts it in his mouth. Alexander sees his silhouette.
Don't do it. Stop!
Semyon
(startled) Shit on fire!
Alexander
Put that thing down
Semyon
What thing?
Alexander
Drop it, Semyon
Semyon
Why?
Alexander
You don't have to do this
We're all your friends here
Alexander restrains him. Semyon puts the black pudding in his pocket.
Semyon
What the fuck are you doing, Kalabushkin? Let me go
Alexander
I saw you with it in your mouth
Semyon
So what?
Alexander
Don't do it, lad. There's always something to live for
20
Semyon
What are you talking about? Let me go
Alexander
Those women are chewing their tails over you Think of them
Semyon
I have been
Alexander
Where were you?
Semyon
Under the bed with newspaper stuffed in my ears
I just wanted some peace
I wanted to think what to do – let me go
Alexander
Promise you won't do anything until you've heard me out
Semyon
All right
Alexander
I beg you as a friend, Semyon Semyonovich
Just listen to me
Semyon
Talk then, I'm listening
Alexander
(releasing him) I want your whole attention
Because what I have to say
Is very meaningful, all right?
Sit down. Look
Semyon sits. Alexander opens a scrappy curtain, casting sickly light over a dying rubber plant, Semyon's pathetic belongings on a cluttered table and the rest of the depressing space. We can see overflowing rubbish bins in the yard outside.
Life is beautiful, Semyon
Semyon
Right
Alexander
Life is a miracle, full of wonder
Semyon
What has that got to do with me?
Alexander
Everything. You're alive, aren't you?
Here you are, at the dawn of a brave new age
21
Age of industry and the working man
Age of medicine and electrics
Semyon
Yeah and what kind of age is it when they cut us off because of an unpaid bill?
Alexander
Good question
Semyon
The fucking Dark Age?
Alexander
It's like living in caves, isn't it? I spent three weeks standing in line every day just to get them to adjust that bill – their mistake of course. But it doesn't matter whose mistake it is, we're the ones who suffer and you ask yourself finally, is that what I'm living for?
Semyon
Yes
Alexander
Some bureaucrat in a heated office saying this regulation, that regulation, and if it's not electrics it's the wording on the licence for my stall or a travel permit – one form after another and finally as the queue stretches on before you through eternity you find you're tired of living
Semyon
Yes
Yes
Alexander
Tired of fucking living just for that
But
Life is beautiful, comrade
Semyon
You know I read that in the paper the other day and I'm sure that they'll retract it soon
Alexander
You know what your problem is, Semyon?
You think too much
Semyon
I know
Alexander
You should get your head down
Dignity of labour and all that
Only time you find a bit of peace is when you're working
22
Semyon
I'm unemployed
Alexander
Oh it's vicious, isn't it? What a struggle
Semyon
It's killing me, I swear it
Every job I go for
I stand in line with fifty other men
Who all look just like me
And forty-nine of us are turned away
I have no dignity, no labour, no value at all
Alexander
How d'you go on with a life like that?
Semyon
I can't believe there's no work in Russia. There is so much to do. Why do they have no work for me?
Alexander
Listen, you have to find a purpose, lad. Even if you don't find a job, you must find a purpose
Semyon
That's just what I was thinking under the bed. What I need is a vocation, a reason for living, and then, down between the floorboards, my fingers chanced on this. It seems like fate
Alexander
What is it?
Semyon
I hardly dare tell you. It's a manual for playing the tuba
Alexander
The tuba?
Semyon
Look: you can learn in only twenty lessons
Alexander
(reading) 'For the first time Theodor Hugo Schultz, celebrated master of music, shares his knowledge with the masses.'
Semyon
I might be wrong but I reckon you could make a mint. It's like a licence to print money, this. If I did twenty concerts a month at five roubles a go, plus tips –
Alexander
That's a staggering fortune, isn't it?
23
Semyon
At least. I've got the will, I've got the time, I've got the manual; the only thing missing is the tuba
Alexander
So a tuba would give you reason to live?
Semyon
I reckon it would, comrade
Alexander
That's fantastic
I've convinced you
Life's amazing; a thing of beauty
Now give me the gun
Semyon
What gun?
Alexander
The gun I saw you putting in your mouth
Semyon
Are you making a fool out of me?
Alexander
You were trying to top yourself
Semyon
To what myself?
Alexander
To shoot yourself
Semyon
Was I?
Alexander
Everybody knows it
Semyon
Everybody?
Alexander
Yes
Semyon
Top myself?
Alexander
Yes
Semyon
Why?
Alexander
Oh, come on, I can't say I blame you
That mother-in-law
How d'you fucking endure it?
And living off Masha
The guilt must be terrible
She's old before her time – knackered
It's shameful
Semyon
Who told you all this?
24
Alexander
Masha
Semyon
Get out
Leave me alone
Alexander
Now come on, Semyon
In all the important ways
Your life is beautiful
Semyon
Go to hell
Alexander
I will, but give me the gun first
Semyon
Are you absolutely mad? Where would I get a gun?
Alexander
Anywhere; they're ten a rouble these days. Panfidich traded his razor for one at Borzov's round the corner
Semyon
Borzov traded a gun for a razor?
Alexander
It didn't have a permit, like. But then, if you're only going to use it once…
Semyon is suddenly rifling through the belongings on his table.
What're you doing? Semyon, hand it over
Semyon finds a razor. He brandishes it at Alexander, who backs away.
Semyon
Swedish steel
My father's
Alexander
What are you doing with that?
Semyon
I reckon that maybe
I'll not be shaving in this world again
Alexander
Semyon, I implore you
To concentrate totally
On the fact that life is wonderful
25
Semyon
Thanks, Alexander
You've shown me the light
And here's my gun
A pretty tasty way to end it all
Semyon chucks the black pudding at Alexander, then exits out of the window.
Alexander
If you wake Borzov at this hour he'll fucking murder you
Semyon
(off) Save me the bother, then, won't he?
Pause.
Alexander
I am a worthless dog
He takes a bite of the black pudding. Serafima and Margarita enter, with the semi-conscious Masha.
Serafima
Don't drag her, she's not a sack
Margarita
She's bloody heavy
Serafima
Get her thighs
Margarita
I have
Alexander
Give her here
Alexander effortlessly slings Masha over his shoulder.
She doesn't weigh anything;
She's like a little feather bed
He takes her to the bed and puts her on it.
Serafima
It was a huge beast, Alexander Kalabushkin; a red-eyed, pestilent, pregnant bitch. We got it with the spud-masher; pulverised its head. Very pleasant chicken flavour, rat
Masha
Semyon
Alexander
She needs air, poor girl. I'll unbutton her
26
Margarita / Serafima
I'll do it
Masha
Where's my Semyon?
Is he dead?
Alexander
Well not yet, no
But I have to tell you,
He's bloody determined
Masha
Where is he?
Alexander
Gone into the night
Serafima
With no pants?
Alexander
I tried to stop him but he brandished a razor at me
Masha
I have to find him. I was horrible to him. It's my fault
Serafima
(to Alexander) You should have broken both his legs
You should have forced him to see reason.
We should get the police
Alexander / Margarita
No!
Serafima
They'd soon prosecute him. And the court would sort him out
Margarita
You can't sentence a man to live
Serafima
Why not? He deserves it
Margarita
What, the ultimate deterrent? The life penalty?
Serafima
Who are you?
Margarita
Just a stranger, freezing in the night
Masha
What's the answer, then? What'll we do with him?
Alexander
Get him a tuba
27
Serafima
No
Masha
A what?
Alexander
A tuba
Margarita
It's an instrument. Like a trumpet but bigger
Masha
He wants a tuba?
Alexander
It'll be his salvation
If he gets a tuba I guarantee
He'll never top himself
His eyes lit up when he spoke of it
He's found a way, you see
Of being independent
He wants to play for money
Masha
So how much do these tubas cost?
Margarita
About fifty roubles
Masha
If we had fifty roubles
My Semyon would never dream
Of taking his own life
Alexander
Don't I know it, love
Margarita
I've got a tuba
Serafima
Well, I've heard it all now, I really have
Margarita
If you're not interested –
Alexander
Have you not realised who this is?
Margarita
Shut it, Kalabushkin
Alexander
This is Margarita Ivanovna Peryesvetova
Masha
Who?
Serafima
Holy saints protect us. Her?
Alexander
The very same
28
Margarita
Well, thanks a lot. Grandma here'll see that news gets back to my husband
Alexander
Oh come on, Margarita; does he give a toss?
Margarita
Of course he gives a toss. He loves me
Alexander
He's eighty-three
You have to feed him with a spoon
What's he going to do?
Set his dentures on me?
Serafima
You run that coffee shop
That used to be a decent place
I've heard about the way it's gone
Margarita
I'm sure you have. It's a successful business now
A rare feat these days
Serafima
I've heard that it's a decadent shebeen
A gambling den of smutty dancing girls
With party members, lice and drunken priests
Margarita
And instruments for the Federated Socialist Jazz Quintet, including a tuba. Maybe even two
Masha
Margarita Ivanovna –
Margarita
That is my name
Masha
It's a pleasure to meet you
Really
To have a genuine businesswoman in our humble home
It's an honour and an inspiration
Margarita
Yes, it must be
Masha
Would you take pity on a desperate wife and her poor old senile mother and lend us one of your tubas? We'd do anything
Margarita
Well, I was going to suggest a small rental fee but I can see you're a bit hard-pressed. So what I really29 need is someone regular to clean my gents' latrines. Perhaps your mother would oblige?
Masha
Mother
This could save us
Serafima
You think I'm shy of work?
You think I'm scared of your latrines?
I'm the woman who's cleaned where no one else would go. I spent fifteen years mopping gore off a bone surgeon's floor. During the war I put eyes and body parts in sacks –
Masha
Thanks, Mother
Margarita
The tuba's yours, then. Come and get it
Alexander
I'll carry it for you, Masha. Least I can do
Margarita
Isn't that nice? You can help her with your big, strong arms
Alexander
(to Margarita) You think I'm a total bastard, don't you?
Margarita
(to Masha) Men are a burden, always
Margarita exits with Masha and Alexander.
Serafima
(calling after them) What if he comes back before you do?
What if he tries something bad?
Hell fire, I feel sick again
His future on earth might depend on me
I know; I'll rinse his pants
Serafima exits upstairs to the toilet.
Semyon enters through the window. He looks around, making sure the coast is clear. He takes a package out of his pocket and unwraps it: a gun. He puts a couple of bullets in the chamber and closes it. He puts it down.
He sits. He furnishes himself with pen and paper.
30
Semyon
(writing) 'In the event of my death –'
Serafima comes out of the toilet with a dripping pair of pants.
Serafima
Semyon, look
Semyon
I'm looking
Serafima
Your pants. Good as new. Bit of carbolic and a quick scrub
Semyon
Could I be alone for a minute, please?
Serafima
Wait. I've got a joke for you
You'll die laughing
There were these Germans during the war
Semyon
What Germans?
Serafima
Just Germans, you know, any Germans
Semyon
What about them?
Serafima
Well, they ate a live pug. Ha, imagine that
Semyon
A what?
Serafima
A live pug! My dead husband told me that. Oh, he was funny.
A pug is a dog, Semyon
Semyon
They ate a dog?
Serafima
Well, people don't eat live dogs
Semyon
And?
Serafima
And them Germans did
Semyon
Serafima
Serafima
Never mind, I've got another
Semyon
Will you go away?
31
Serafima
You'll love this one; it's a true story
During the war in our village
We had a Turk in jail
A little chap, injured he was; shell-shock
His head used to shake all the time like this
We used to go and peep at him – so comical
Semyon
I'm busy. Can't you see?
Serafima
Anyway, one night we took him bread and meat
Now this Turk is starving, desperate for food, right?
But he can't speak Russian so he jumps up
Arms outstretched when he sees us
But his head's still shaking, so we say
'Don't you want it? Don't you want it?'
And he goes (She mimes.)
So we take it all away again
Serafima roars with laughter.
Semyon
Will you get out?
Serafima
Holy Jesus, did we ever laugh about that Turk
Semyon
Do I have to lock you in your room?
Serafima goes to her room. She turns in the doorway, inspired.
Serafima
I know; during the Coronation, this Jew decided he would chain himself to the palace gates –
Semyon starts throwing things at Serafima's door.
Semyon
OUT
Serafima
And when Blessed Alexander caught him, he said –
Semyon
OUT
OUT
32
Serafima exits. Semyon returns to the table and sits.
(Reads.) 'In the event of my death –'
He continues to write.
'No one is to blame.
Signed, Semyon Semyonovich Podsekalnikov.'
Semyon puts the gun to his temple and closes his eyes. He lowers it.
He puts the gun in his mouth and closes his eyes. He lowers it.
He puts the gun to his heart. He rocks with despair, staring hopelessly at the new day.
A few rubber trees above a trestle stage. Chairs in front of it.
Polly
(before the curtain) In order that the act of the drama may have its full effect on you, you are invited to smoke like chimneys. Our artistes are the best in the world, our drinks over proof, our seats comfortable, bets on the story's outcome can be placed at the bars, acts will end and the curtain fall according to how the betting goes. Kindly do not take shots at the pianist, he is doing his best. Anyone who doesn't get the plot first go off needn't bother, it's incomprehensible. If you insist on seeing something full of meaning you should go to the gents. Ticket money will be refunded under no circumstances. Here is our comrade Jip, whose privilege it is to play the Elephant Calf, Jackie Pall. If that should strike you as impossibly difficult then all I can say is that stage artistes have got to be able to do absolutely anything.
Soldier
(in audience) Hear hear.
Polly
Presenting Jesse Mahoney as the Elephant Calf's mother, with Uriah Shelley, the famous international turf expert, as the Moon. It will furthermore be your good fortune to see my humble self in the important role of the Banana Tree.
Soldiers
Get started, can't you? Fancy charging ten cents for rubbish like that.
Polly
Permit me to inform you that we are absolutely impervious to crude interjections of that sort. The play is mostly about a crime committed by the Elephant Calf. I'm just telling you so that we don't have to keep interrupting.
80
Uriah
(behind the curtain) Alleged to have been committed.
Polly
Quite right. That's because the only part I've read is my own. The Elephant Calf is innocent, you see.
Soldiers
(slow clapping) Get on with the show, get on with the show.
Polly
All right, all right. (Steps behind the curtain.) You know I'm not sure we didn't charge too much for admission. What do you blokes think?
Uriah
Much too late to worry about that now. We just have to jump in at the deep end.
Polly
It's such a feeble play, that's the difficulty. I'm sure you can't really remember, Jesse, how things went in the real theatre, and I rather think, Jesse, that what you've forgotten is the most important part of it. Here, half a mo', I've been taken short. (The curtain rises.) I am the Banana Tree.
Soldier
High time too.
Polly
The arbiter of the jungle. I have been standing here on a parched savannah in South Punjab, yea ever since elephants were first invented. Now and then, but mainly in the evening, the Moon cometh to me to lay a complaint against an Elephant Calf, let's say.
Uriah
You're going too fast. You're half way there. It's ten cents, you know. (Enters.)
Polly
Greetings, Moon, whence comest thou at this late hour?
Uriah
I have heard a good one about an Elephant Calf —
Polly
Art laying a complaint against it?
Uriah
Aye, of course.
Polly
So the Elephant Calf hath perpetrated a crime?
Uriah
It is precisely as thou supposest, indeed this is an instance of thy perspicacity from which naught can be hid.
Polly
O, you've seen nothing yet. Hath not the Elephant Calf murdered his mother?
Uriah
Indeed he hath.
Polly
Well, that's terrible.
81
Uriah
Appalling it is.
Polly
If only I could find my specs.
Uriah
I just happen to have a pair on me, if they should fit you.
Polly
They would fit all right if only they had lenses in them. Look, no lenses.
Uriah
Better than nothing, anyway.
Polly
It's not a laughing matter.
Uriah
Aye, it is passing strange. Therefore I lay a complaint against the Moon, or rather the Elephant Calf.
Enter the Elephant Calf, slowly.
Polly
Ah, here is that agreeable Elephant Calf. Whence comest thou, eh?
Galy Gay
I am the Elephant Calf. Seven Rajahs stood around my cradle. What are you laughing at, Moon?
Uriah
Keep talking, Elephant Calf.
Galy Gay
My name is Jackie Pall. I am taking a walk.
Polly
They tell me thou didst beat thy mother to death.
Galy Gay
No, I just broke her milk jug to pieces.
Uriah
On her head, on her head.
Galy Gay
No, Moon, on a stone, on a stone.
Polly
And I tell thee thou didst do it, as sure as I am a Banana Tree.
Uriah
And as sure as I am the Moon I shall prove it, and my first proof is this woman here.
Enter Jesse as the Elephant Calf's mother.
Polly
Who's that?
Uriah
It's his mother.
Polly
Isn't that rather peculiar?
Uriah
Not in the least.
Polly
All the same it does strike me as peculiar her being there.
Uriah
Not me.
Polly
Then she may as well stay, but of course you will have to prove it.
Uriah
Thou art the judge.
82
Polly
All right, Elephant Calf, prove that thou didst not murder thy Mother.
Soldier
(in the audience) Hey, with her standing there …
Uriah
(to the audience) That's just the point.
Soldier
Even the start's a load of tripe. With his mother standing there. How on earth can the rest of the play be worth bothering about?
Jesse
I am the Elephant Calf's Mother, and I bet my little Jackie can prove quite conclusively that he's no murderer. Eh, Jackie?
Uriah
And I bet that he cannot and will not.
Polly
(bellows) Curtain!
The audience goes silently to the bar and loudly and aggressively orders cocktails.
Polly
(behind the curtain:) That went very nicely, not a single boo.
Galy Gay
I'd like to know why nobody applauded?
Jesse
Perhaps they found it too gripping.
Polly
But it's so interesting.
Uriah
If only we had a few chorus girls to flash their bums at them they'd tear up the seats. Get out in front, we must have a go at the betting lark.
Polly
(before the curtain) Gentlemen …
Soldiers
Here, none of that. Let's have a proper interval. Give us time for a drink. A fellow needs it in this place.
Polly
We just wanted to see if we could get you to lay a bet or two, on one of the two parties, that is, Mother versus Moon.
Soldiers
Bloody cheek. So that's their way of squeezing extra cash out of us. Just you wait till they get going. You ain't seen nothing yet.
Polly
All right. Bets on the Mother, this side. (Nobody moves.) For the Moon, over here. (Nobody moves.)
Uriah
(behind the curtain) Have they placed their bets?
Polly
Not so as you'd notice. They say that the best part's still to come, which I find most disturbing.
83
Jesse
They're drinking so appallingly, it's as if they couldn't sit through the rest otherwise.
Uriah
Sock them with a bit of music, that'll cheer them up.
Polly
(steps through the curtain) Now for a few discs. (Withdraws. Curtain up.) Step forth, Moon, Mother and Elephant Calf, and ye shall learn the complete explanation of this mysterious crime, and you lot out there too. How dost thou hope to conceal the fact that thou, Jackie Pall, didst stab thine honourable Mother to death?
Galy Gay
How could I have done, seeing as how I am but a defenceless maiden?
Polly
Art thou? Then let me put it to thee, Jackie Pall, that thou art by no means a maiden, as thou claimest. Now hark ye to my first major proof I recall a strange incident in my childhood in Whitechapel —
Soldier
South Punjab. (Roars of laughter.)
Polly
– in South Punjab, when a fellow dressed up – as a girl so as not to have to go off to the war. Up came the sergeant and tossed a round in his lap, and because he didn't move his legs apart, like a girl would to catch it in her skirt, the sergeant could tell he was a man, and the same thing here. (They do it.) There you are, now you all know the Elephant Calf's a man. Curtain!
Curtain. Feeble applause.
Polly
It's a smash hit, hear that? Curtain up! Take a bow!
Curtain. Applause stops.
Uriah
They're positively nasty. It's all no use. The whole thing's hopeless.
Jesse
We must simply pack it in and refund their money. It's a matter of to be lynched or not to be lynched, that is the question; the situation is absolutely critical. Have a look out front.
Uriah
What, refund their money? Not on your life. There isn't a theatre in the world could stand that.
Soldiers
Tomorrow we'll be moving off to Tibet, eh, Georgie, may be the last time you ever sit under the rubber84trees swigging four-cent cocktails. It's not particularly good weather for a war, or else it would be quite nice here, apart from this show.
Soldier
How about entertaining giving us a bit of a song, like 'Johnny Bowlegs, pack your kit and trek' say?
Soldiers
Bravo. (Sing 'Janny mit dem Hoppelbein'.)
Uriah
They've started their own singing now. We must get going again.
Polly
I wish I were out there with them, 'Johnnys'' one of my favourite songs. Why couldn't we give them something like that? (Curtain up.) Now that… (He is competing with the singing.) Now that the Elephant Calf…
Soldier
Still going on about that Elephant Calf!
Polly
As I was saying, now that the …
Soldier
Acting unpaid lance-calf.
Polly
… That the animal in question has been exposed as a swindler by my first major proof, we move on to the second, even majorer proof.
Soldier
Can't we skip that one, Polly?
Uriah
Don't let them rattle you, Polly.
Polly
I suggest that thou art a murderer, Elephant Calf. Therefore prove thine inability to murder, let's say, the Moon.
Soldier
That's not right. It's for the Banana Tree to do the proving.
Polly
But that's just it. Now watch out. We've reached a particularly crucial point of the drama. As I was saying, thou must prove thine inability to murder, let's say, the Moon. Climb up this creeper of mine and take a knife with thee. (Galy Gay does so. The Moon holds the top of the rope ladder.)
Soldiers
(quieten a few who want to continue singing) Quiet! It's a tricky climb, you know, what with not being able to see out of that elephant's head.
Jesse
So long as he doesn't choose this moment to piss. Give it all you've got, Uriah. (Uriah gives a cry.)
85
Uriah
Oh, oh, oh!
Polly
What's the matter, Moon, wherefore thy cries?
Uriah
Because it hurteth so. Emphatically this is a murderer climbing towards me.
Galy Gay
Hang the ladder on a branch, Uriah, I'm awfully weary.
Uriah
Oh, he is tearing my hand off. My hand! My hand! He is tearing off my hand.
Polly
There you are, there you are.
Galy Gay has Uriah's artificial hand in his hands and shows it to the audience.
Jesse
That's bad, Jackie. I would not have thought it of thee. Thou art no child of mine.
Uriah
(holds up stump of his hand) I attest him to be a murderer.
Polly
Behold the bleeding stump with which he attesteth; nor hast thou proved that it is impossible for thee to commit a murder, Elephant Calf, for now thou hast furthermore so handled the Moon that it must needs bleed to death before first light. Curtain! (Curtain. He immediately comes forward.) If anyone's interested in betting it can be done at the bar.
Soldiers
(go to place bets) A cent on the Moon, half a cent on the Elephant Calf.
Uriah
Look, they're starting to nibble. Now, Jesse, it's all yours with the sorrowing Mother's speech. (Curtain up.)
Jesse

Do you all know what a mother is?
Ah, her heart is tender as no other is.
Tender your mother's heart as you lay in her
Tender the mother's hand that fed you dinner
Tender the mother's eye that watched you play
Tender the mother's foot that led the way
Laughter.
And when a mother's heart sinks beneath the sod
Laughter.
A noble soul goes shooting up to God.
86
Laughter.
Hear a mother, hear a mother weeping:
Laughter.
Mine is the bosom where this calf lay sleeping.
Stormy, prolonged laughter.
Soldiers
Encore! That alone's worth ten cents. Bravo! Hurrah! Three cheers for the Mother. Hip, hip, hooray!
Curtain falls.
Uriah
Carry on! It's a hit! Get on stage!
Curtain up.
Polly
I have demonstrated that thou art a man capable of committing a murder. Now I put it to thee, Elephant Calf: art of the opinion that this is thy mother?
Soldiers
It's a damned unfair business, what they're performing up there, it absolutely goes against nature, it does. But very deep, very philosophical. They'll have some sort of happy ending up their sleeve, you bet. Quiet!
Polly
Far be it from me to suggest, of course, that any child in the world would touch a hair of the head of the mother that bore him in any country under traditional British rule. (Hear, hear.) Rule Britannia! (All sing 'Rule Britannia'.) I thank you gentlemen. So long as this moving ditty resounds from rough masculine throats all will be well with England and her traditions. But on with the show! In as much as thou, O Elephant Calf, didst truly murder this universally beloved woman and great artiste – (Hear, hear) – it cannot possibly be the case that thou, Jackie Pall, art son or daughter of this celebrated lady – (Hear, hear) – moreover whatever a Banana Tree suggests he also proves. (Applause.) So take a piece of billiard chalk, thou Moon of Cooch Behar, and draw a firm circle in the centre of the stage. Thereupon take an ordinary rope in thy hand and wait until this profoundly stricken Mother steps into the middle of thy doubtless most incompetently drawn circle. Place the rope delicately round her white neck.
87
Soldiers
Round her lovely white mother's neck, round her lovely white mother's neck.
Polly
Exactly. But thou, the alleged Jackie Pall, take the other end of this judicial rope and place thyself outside the circle over against the Moon. There; and now I ask thee, woman, didst thou give birth to a murderer? Art silent? Well, then. I just wanted to show you, gentlemen, that the mother herself, whom you see represented here, turns her back on her fallen child. But soon I shall show you even more, for soon the terrible sun of justice will be focussing its rays into the most hidden depths of this affair.
Soldiers
Don't overdo it, Polly. Sh!
Polly
For the last time, Jackie Pall, dost persist in suggesting that thou art this wretched woman's son?
Galy Gay
Yes.
Polly
Well, well. So thou art her son? A moment ago thou didst claim to be her daughter, but thou art not all that exact in thy statements. We shall now proceed, gentlemen, to our last and most important patent super-proof, which will not only surpass anything you have seen so far, but is guaranteed to give you total satisfaction. If thou, Jackie Pall, art this mother's child, then thou willst have been given the strength to pull thine alleged mother out of the circle to thy side. That's clear enough.
Soldiers
Crystal clear. Clear as a shithouse window. Hey, wait. He's got it all wrong. Just you stick to the truth, Jackie.
Polly
When I count three, pull. (All count.) Go! (Galy Gay pulls Jesse out of the circle to his side.)
Jesse
Hey! Stop! Goddam! What d'you think you're up to? My neck!
Soldiers
What about it? Pull, Jackie! Stop! He's as blue as a fish out of water.
Jesse
Help!
Galy Gay
My side! my side!
Polly
How about that, eh? Did you ever see such crude88behaviour? Now shall unnatural deception reap its reward. For thou hast clearly made a terrible mistake. By thy crude tugging hast thou proved, not what thou intendedst, but merely that under no circumstances cans't thou be son or daughter of this wretchedly tormented Mother. Thou hast made plain the truth, Jackie Pall.
Soldiers
Oho! Bravo! Stinking! Nice family, I don't think. Pack it in, Jackie, you've had it. Always tell the truth, Jackie.
Polly
All right, gentlemen, I think that should do. That ought to look after our patent super-proof, I'd think. Now listen carefully, gentlemen, and I'd like those gentlemen to listen who saw fit to make a disturbance at the start of our show, and those who backed this miserable proof-riddled Elephant Calf with their good pence: this Elephant Calf is a murderer. The Elephant Calf, which is not the daughter of this honourable mother, as it suggested, but the son, as I have proved, and not the son either, as you saw, but simply no child whatsoever of this matron, whom it simply murdered, even though here she stands in full view of you all, acting as if nothing had happened, which is perfectly natural, even though previously unheard-of, as I can prove, and in fact I can now prove everything and am suggesting a great deal more and won't let myself be put off but insist on getting my certificate and even prove that, for I put it to you: what is anything without proof? (Steadily increasing applause.) Without proof men aren't men but orangutans, as proved by Darwin, and what about Progress, and just bat an eyelid, thou wretched little nonentity of a lie-sodden Elephant Calf, phoney to the very marrow, then I'll absolutely prove – in fact this is really the point of the whole thing, gentlemen – that this here Elephant Calf is no Elephant Calf whatsoever, but none other than Jeraiah Jip from Tipperary.
Soldiers
Hooray.
Galy Gay
It won't wash.
89
Polly
And why not? Why won't it wash?
Galy Gay
Because it's not in the book. Take that back.
Polly
Anyway, you're a murderer.
Galy Gay
That's a lie.
Polly
But I can prove it. Prove it, prove it, prove it.
Galy Gay hurls himself with a groan at the Banana Tree whose base gives way under the force of his attack.
Polly
(falling) See that? See that?
Uriah
All right, now you are a murderer.
Polly
(groaning) And I proved it.
Curtain.
Uriah
Straight into the song, now.
The four players quickly take up positions before the curtain and sing.

What a bit of all right in Uganda
Seven cents a seat on the verandah
And the poker games we played with that old tiger –
No, I've never played as well as that.
When we bet the hide off old Pa Krueger
He bet nothing but his battered hat.
     How peacefully the moon shone in Uganda!
     Through the cool night we sat about
     Until sunrise
     And then pulled out.
     A man needs money to be able
     To sit at the poker table
     With a tiger in disguise.
     (Seven cents a seat on the verandah.)
Soldiers
Is it all over? It's a bloody travesty of justice. Call that a proper ending? You can't leave off like that. Keep the curtain up. Play on.
Polly
What do you mean? We've come to the end of the script. Be reasonable, the play's over.
Soldiers
I never heard such a piece of cheek in all my life.90It's an absolute utter outrage, it offends every decent human instinct. (A compact group climbs on the stage and says seriously) We want our money back. Either the Elephant Calf comes to a proper conclusion or else every single cent piece of ours must be on your table in two seconds, you Moon of Cooch Behar.
Polly
It is our earnest submission that what we performed was the absolute truth.
Soldiers
All right, just you wait. We'll give you absolute truth.
Polly
The fact is that you've no notion of art and no idea how artists should be treated.
Soldiers
Don't waste your breath.
Galy Gay
I wouldn't like you blokes to imagine I wouldn't stick up for what you've just seen, get me?
Polly
Bravo, boss.
Galy Gay
Don't let's beat about the bush. Whichever of you is keenest to get his money back, let me just say I'd like to invite that particular phenomenon to step outside straight away for eight rounds with the four-ounce gloves.
Soldiers
Go on Towneley, see if you can wipe the floor with that Elephant Calf's little trunk.
Galy Gay
And now I fancy we'll see if what we performed was the absolute truth, or if it was good or bad theatre, my friends.
All off to the fight.
Zack sits opposite Zlobin (Popov in a Russian official's hat), files on his desk. Zlobin squeezes a tangerine. Beat.
Zlobin
Right.
Zack
But he's stable.
Zlobin
Yes.
Zack
For now. There are enzymes, but –
Zlobin
What?
Zack
Enzymes.
Zlobin
Oh right.
Zack
Inside the crocodile.
Zlobin
Wow.
Zack
But he's wearing a hacking jacket.
Zlobin
Great.
Zack
So I think that's not a problem.
Zlobin
Yes. I didn't understand any of the stuff about enzymes.
Zack
Yeah, don't worry, that's not important really –
Zlobin
There's a man in a crocodile?
Zack
Yes.
Zlobin
That's the gist?
Zack
It is, yes.
Zlobin
Okay. Well, I've made a note of that.
Zack
Good. Um… so obviously, we need to think about how to get him out.
Zlobin
Yes. Uh. I guess… let me see if my predecessor ever had one of these.
34
He flicks through some files.
Zack
I'm pretty sure he wouldn't have –
Zlobin
She!
(Looks.) Uh… nothing under crocodile.
Zack
Yeah. So I think, we could maybe sedate the crocodile and –
Zlobin
Worth looking under alligator?
Zack
Oh right. I mean, maybe, but… still quite unlikely I'd have –
Zlobin
Nothing. Sorry, you were saying?
Zack
Yes, if we drug the crocodile and then maybe open it up and –
Zlobin
Open how?
Zack
Either just the mouth, or maybe actually cut open the stomach and –
Zlobin
Oh my God!!
Zack
Oh, yes, I suppose so –
Zlobin
Because I should say, right off the bat, the owner of the crocodile, Mr Popov, has already been in –
Zack
Oh right –
Zlobin
Lovely guy. Very handsome. And he made it very clear that he's keen for his crocodile not to be interfered with in any way, shape or indeed otherwise.
Zack
Okay, but, we have to do something.
Zlobin
Oh completely! Completely agree. The problem, of course, being that the crocodile is a business asset. Do you see what I mean?
Zack
No.
Zlobin
Well, it's his main earner, and therefore, main factor –
Zack
In… what?
35
Zlobin
In what we do. Plus the zoo itself is foreign-owned, and we do have a commitment to foreign investors in this country that means to a great extent letting them mind their own businesses.
Zack
But… he might die in there.
Zlobin
And he might not.
Zack
Okay, but he will at some point.
Zlobin
And so will we all.
Zack
Yeah, no, I know that –
Zlobin
Hate to break it to you!
Zack
Yeah, but, the human, the risk to human life comes before the risk to business assets, though, surely?
Zlobin
Well, it's the same thing really. What's best for business is ultimately best for us. And if the reptile-displaying industry wants to remain competitive, then they will want to avoid getting members of the public stuck in their assets, and will therefore, in time, sort this out. Thank God.
Zack
Yeah. There's a man in a crocodile.
Zlobin
I know that. I made a note of that.
Zack
So we don't have any time. We have to do something for him now!
Zlobin
Completely. And if he owned the crocodile in question of course we could and indeed, would spring into, into it, but as he doesn't, he is technically, isn't he, squatting.
Zack
So? Does that matter?
Zlobin
Well, it makes it a lot slower, yes. Squatters are both legally protected, not to mention, stubborn –
Zack
But he doesn't want to be in there.
Zlobin
And that's the housing situation all over. My advice would be to see if he can squat in it for another twelve years, at which point it would legally become his property and we can cut him out lickety-split.
36
Zack
Yeah, look… is there someone else I can speak to?
Zlobin
Well, that's not very nice!
Zack
I don't feel like you're taking it very seriously.
Zlobin
Well I am! What do you think I'm squeezing this tangerine for?
Zack
I've got no idea –
Zlobin
To deal with stress! I don't even like them. This is what I do when I'm taking things seriously. So far I've only done it for murders.
Zack
Okay, well –
Zlobin
So don't come in here and start telling me how to do my job. Yuri.
Zack
My name's Zack.
Zlobin
Zack. I realise you're quite miffed about what's happened to your friend, but if you ask me, it's his fault for dangling his legs at the crocodile's face, and, in a way, what did he think would happen?
Zack
Well, not this –
Zlobin
How do I even know he didn't do it on purpose?
Zack
What? Why would he do that?
Zlobin
I don't know! People are odd, mate. That's one thing I've learnt doing this job. If you can imagine it, there'll be someone out there who's in to it. Maybe he was starved of attention as a child, maybe it's a sex thing, who cares? Point being, we can't start throwing taxpayers' money away because some pervert gets off on inserting himself into animals. How's that going to look?
Zack
Not as bad as if you leave him in there I expect –
Zlobin
Cos it's our cocks on the blocks, sunshine. We make one bad move here and the press'll shit on us from every angle. I so much as point a penknife in the direction of this37crocodile and there'll be animal lovers chucking pints of blood at me outside my houseboat. Your mate. Where does he live?
Zack
You mean… before the crocodile?
Zlobin
Yes. And what's he do?
Zack
He's a sort of performance artist slash actor who lives in Nevsky –
Zlobin
Oh my God! No, no, no, this is a perfect storm. They'll side with the crocodile. Definitely. I can see the articles now. They'll start banging on about how few crocodiles there are in the wild and how these entitled, arty wankers think they can go around inhabiting them rent-free. This is toxic, mate.
Anya enters, breathless.
Anya
Zack!
Zlobin
What?
Zack
It's okay, she's with me.
Zlobin
It's not that okay, it's my office –
Zack
Is Ivan alright?
Anya
Yes, he's fine. He's better than fine actually.
Zack
Did you find a vet…?
Anya
I, no, don't be angry…
Zack
What's going on?
Anya
I went to the press. And said about how Ivan was in a crocodile –
Zack
Oh, for God's sake, Anya…
Zlobin
Ooh, now, what are they saying?
Anya
They think it's brilliant –
Zlobin
(to Zack) Right, you see, I told you…
38
Zack
What do you mean, brilliant?
Anya
Everyone's talking about it! People from all over the city are flooding down to see him.
Zack
Oh my God…
Anya
There are queues round the block.
Zack
Is Ivan okay?
Anya
He's thrilled!
Zlobin
Are they saying what they want the police to do?
Zack
But I mean… is he still alive?
Anya
Yeah, he's singing.
Zack
He's what?
Zlobin
Because it would be very useful to get a steer on that…
Zack
He's singing?
The lights focus back on Ivan. We are immediately…
The winter afternoon light has managed to find its way into the space. Semyon is sitting on a stool, holding a tuba. The manual is in front of him. Masha and Serafima are watching with anxious interest.
Semyon
(reads) 'Chapter One. How to play. The tuba is played with three fingers. Put the first finger on the first valve, the second finger on the second valve and the third finger on the third valve.'
He looks up, holding his position. He looks handsome, confident.
How's that?
Serafima
You're a natural
Masha
You look amazing
Semyon
'Upon blowing into the mouthpiece, the note "B" is obtained.'
Semyon blows. He blows again. Nothing.
It's not doing it
Why isn't it doing it?
Serafima
(to Masha) Oh Masha, hold on tight. If he gives up on this one we're lost
Semyon
Hang on, hang on a minute: 'How To Blow.'
Masha
You look really gifted
Really elegant, Semyon, really
Semyon
'In order to blow properly, I, Theodor Hugo34Schultz, internationally renowned Concert Tubist, suggest a simple and economical method.
'Tear off a little piece of yesterday's newspaper and place it on the tongue.' Newspaper – we need paper
Serafima and Masha start hunting through the clutter of the room.
Serafima
Does it have to be yesterday's?
Semyon
No
Masha
(finding one) Here. Here
Semyon
Right. Tear off a bit
A smaller bit than that; do you want to choke me?
Put it on my tongue
Masha does so. Semyon mumbles unintelligibly.
Masha
Pardon?
More unintelligible mumbling. Masha looks blank. Semyon spits out the paper.
Semyon
I said will you read the next instruction? God!
Semyon puts another piece of paper in his mouth.
Masha
'Tear off a little piece of yesterday's newspaper and place it on the tongue.'
Semyon
Uhhhhh
Masha
'Then, spit the paper on to the floor
While spitting, try to memorise the position of your mouth.
Having mastered it, blow, just like you spit.'
Semyon
Uhhhhh
Semyon prepares himself. He spits. Without moving his mouth, he puts it over the mouthpiece. He blows. Nothing.
35
Masha
Dear God in Heaven
If you exist
Please let him make a sound
Semyon blows. A loud, shattering bellow from the tuba.
Serafima
(to Masha) I told you I was right about God. There's your proof
Semyon
Masha, hand in your notice. Your working days are over
Masha embraces him.
Twenty concerts a month at five roubles each plus tips. In pure earnings per year, that's… Hang on, I wrote it down. (He rummages in his pocket.) 'In the event of my dea –' No! (He chucks the paper on the desk.) Here it is. Per year, at least one thousand three hundred and twenty roubles
Serafima
But you haven't learnt to play it yet
Semyon
Are you deaf?
He blows the instrument again. A loud bellow.
Masha
It's beautiful
You're brilliant
Semyon
Just think, just think, Mashenka, how good it'll be.
Imagine it, me coming home from a weekend concert
Applause still ringing in my ears
Pockets stuffed with money,
You waiting on our doorstep, dressed in fine cotton prints
You'll sit me on our chaise-lounge and I'll say
'Has your mother polished our floors today?'
And you'll say
36
Masha
Yes, Senyechka
With our polishing machine
Serafima
You'd better learn to play it first
Semyon
Listen to the music, woman
He blows another bellowing note. Yegor appears on the stairs.
Yegor
What in hell's name is that? Battleship Potemkin coming up the street?
Semyon
Get used to it, comrade. It's your new neighbour
Yegor
You're not playing that in here
Semyon
Yes I am
Yegor
Over my dead body
Semyon
Rather yours than mine, mate
Yegor
I'll complain about you
The housing committee will hear about this
The rooms are like gold dust, you know
Semyon
Shut up
Yegor
I'll fill in a form about you
Semyon blows. Yegor disappears, slamming his door.
Semyon
And then I'll say, 'Where's my eggnog?'
I'll have eggnog with every meal
Masha
It's a sin, the way you love eggnog
Semyon
And your mother'll bring me one on a tray
Masha
In a proper glass
Semyon
On a doily. And I'll say, 'Mashenka, is the nursery decorated yet?'
Masha
And I'll – (She is choked.)
Oh Senyechka
37
Serafima
Will you learn to play the blasted thing?
Semyon
If I'm to develop as a Concert Tubist I need peace, Serafima. These are vital moments of creativity
Masha
We'll have a nursery
Semyon
Silence and focus, please. (He reads.) 'Scales. The scale is the umbilical cord of music. Once you have mastered the scale, you are a born musician.' Well, it can't be that hard
Masha
And my fine cotton prints will get bigger and bigger until one day –
Semyon looks at his wife, full of love.
Serafima
Will you let him get on with it?
Masha
Learn your scales, Senyechka
Semyon turns back to the book. He reads:
Semyon
'In order to conquer the scale, I, Theodor Hugo Schultz, internationally renowned Concert Tubist, suggest the following cheap and easy method. Go out and buy yourself a…'
He turns the page.
'Piano.'
Serafima / Masha
A piano?
Semyon
That can't be right
What's he talking about?
(Reads) 'Buy yourself a…
(Checks to see if pages are stuck.) Piano.'
Masha
Read on. It can't be right
Semyon
'Check the appendix for more information on the piano.'
Appendix, appendix
38
(Reads) 'Play the scale on your piano according to the diagram below and then copy it to your tuba.'
No, no, it can't be
Mashenka, Serafima
What are we going to buy a piano with?
Masha
Oh no
Semyon
Theodor Hugo Schultz you villain
You scum
Masha
Where will we get a piano?
Semyon is tearing up the manual.
Semyon
World-renowned Concert Tubist?
You're a swindling bastard
Cheat and bastard
Bastard
May you and your scales rot in hell
Semyon is raging with grief.
Serafima
You can't trust anyone these days
Semyon
What has he done to me?
He was my rock of salvation
I could see my future through this tuba
Serafima
Never mind. It made a shocking racket anyway
Semyon
This is the end
How will we live?
Masha is trying to comfort him.
Masha
We'll manage
Serafima
We always manage
Masha
We can get by on my wages
Serafima
Like we always have
Semyon
Meaning I don't count!
39
Masha
What else are we to do?
Semyon
It's killing me
What about if we break a cup?
Have we got enough to replace it?
He breaks a cup.
No. Can we afford a new plate? NO
He smashes a plate. Yegor Timoveivich comes out of his room to watch.
Masha
You BABY
Semyon
Can we afford your mother? NO
Serafima
I have a job cleaning toilets now
Semyon
Why don't I have a job?
What about if I smash this vase?
Masha
That's mine
It's mine
Semyon
Can we buy another on your shitty wage?
Serafima
(to Masha) Say we can't!
Masha
Semyon, don't!
They fight for the vase. Semyon smashes it. Masha lets out a howl.
Serafima
Now look what you've done
Masha
That was mine
I made it at school
When I was a little girl
When I still had hope
And now you've ruined it
Semyon
Just like I've ruined you; that's what you're saying
40
Masha
Stop telling me what I'm saying
Semyon
I wish this was my skull
Semyon smashes another plate.
Masha
You want to smash things? Let's smash them.
Can we afford a new mirror? – NO
Masha smashes the mirror. Semyon is shocked.
Semyon
What are you doing? That's seven years' bad luck
Masha
Everything shattered
Plates, cups
My human life
And you don't care
Masha is sobbing. Semyon is completely taken aback.
Semyon
Mashenka
Since the day we married I've let you down
You'd be much better off without me
You should leave. I beg you
For God's sake leave me
I'll disappear
Masha
You'll what?
Semyon
I'll vanish
Blow away like a smokewreath
Extinguish myself
Masha
How dare you say that
Me and my mother
We are the only two people in the world
Who would stand by your grave and weep for you
You go ahead and top yourself
But know this: I won't be there and neither will she
Do it and you die alone.
You're a selfish bastard, Semyon
Pause.
41
Serafima
Are you leaving him, then?
Semyon and Masha are both devastated.
Is she leaving you, Semyon? Is that the plan?
(To Masha.) We could go back to the village
The bone surgeon wouldn't let me starve
And there's work digging turnips out of the frost
Come on now
Come on
Serafima escorts Masha into her room. She closes the door. Yegor exits. Semyon is alone.
Semyon
Plates, cups, my human life
Two people standing over the grave
Only one who cares if I live or die
And I have shattered her
Set her free
Let's have one less flea in the fleapit
Split me with a fingernail and wipe me away
He grabs his gun.
Count to ten and the torment's over
He puts the gun to his temple and closes his eyes. Alexander enters, leading Aristarkh Dominikovich Grand-Skubik up the stairs. His ragged suit and coat still show signs of impeccable tailoring. He's in his forties, highly educated and quite desperate.
Semyon
One, two, three –
Alexander
He lives up there
Aristarkh
I can't thank you enough
Semyon
Four, five
Alexander
The small fee we talked about then, for arranging the meeting –
42
Semyon
Six –
Aristarkh
Of course
Semyon
Seven –
Aristarkh
That should cover it
Semyon
Eight, nine –
Alexander
Give him a shout; he hasn't got a bell
Alexander exits back down the stairs.
Semyon
Ten
Aristarkh
(calling) I say, comrade
Semyon is utterly startled. He hides the gun and draws back the curtain.
Sorry to interrupt. I hope you weren't busy. Do carry on
Semyon
You're fine
Aristarkh
Well, I shan't keep you for long. Do I have the honour of addressing Semyon Semyonovich Podsekalnikov?
Semyon
Yes, sir
Aristarkh
Oh, don't call me 'sir'. Here we are, two ordinary thinking chaps, no difference between us
Semyon
Right
Aristarkh
Are you the same Podsekalnikov who has declared an intention to kill himself?
Semyon
Who told you that? I mean no, I never said that. I'm not him. I've got no weapons here
Aristarkh
Well, I was taking my coffee at Margarita Ivanovna's – as is my habit, being a keen observer of the proletariat – and it was the topic of all the conversation
Semyon
No way
43
Aristarkh
That fairground chap Kalabushkin had us all enthralled. You pulled a razor on a him; good for you; shows a fine spirit
Semyon
Look, if you're looking for unlicensed firearms I can't help you. And I don't know anything about anyone trying to top themselves
Aristarkh
Ah. (He picks up Semyon's discarded note from the table and reads.) 'In the event of my death, no one is to blame.' Well, this is interesting, you see, because it looks like a suicide note. And then you've signed it, haven't you?
Semyon
I haven't done anything wrong, sir
Aristarkh
My dear equal, I haven't come here to persecute; on the contrary; I'm here to assist you
Semyon
How?
Aristarkh
Well, my first duty is obviously to try and persuade you not to do it. But if you are determined then I think you should know that this note shows some very wrong thinking. Are you determined?
Semyon slowly nods.
Aristarkh
Well then. This note is based on an entirely faulty point of view
Semyon
What do you mean?
Aristarkh
Semyon – I may call you Semyon, mayn't I, in these egalitarian days?
Semyon
Yes
Aristarkh
I have bolted down my coffee, so keen was my desire to meet you
Semyon
Why?
44
Aristarkh
Because you are shooting yourself. You have an opportunity here that cannot be wasted. It is wonderful
Semyon
Is it?
Aristarkh
But you must shoot yourself not just as an individual, you must shoot yourself as a responsible member of society. Remember, you are not alone. You are one of us; you're a thinking man. So think, Semyon, think. Why is this a useless note?
Semyon
Er –
Aristarkh
No one is to blame? Poppycock; of course someone is to blame. Look around you, Semyon; what do you see?
Semyon
Not much
Aristarkh
Russia. You see Russia. Look at her finest men; the intelligentsia. What do you hear?
Semyon
Nothing
Aristarkh
Precisely; because they have been silenced, silenced like white slaves in the proletariat's harem. Semyon, you are in a position of great power
Semyon
Am I?
Aristarkh
You are a dead man
Semyon
Well, not yet –
Aristarkh
You soon will be. And nowadays, only the dead may say what the living think. I come to you as to a dead comrade. I come to you on behalf of Russia's thinking men
Semyon
I'm not anyone important, sir
Aristarkh
You could be. My dear boy, you're right to take leave of your life. It's not worth living; of course it's45not; it must be simply ghastly. But someone is to blame. I cannot speak without restraint but you can. You have nothing to lose, nothing to fear. You are soon to be free. And so, Semyon, tell me, who do you blame?
Semyon
Who do I blame?
Aristarkh
Don't be afraid, hold nothing back
Semyon
Theodor Hugo Schultz
Aristarkh
Well, I don't know him personally but I'm sure the Comintern is full of chaps just like him. So let's blame them all, shall we?
Semyon
What?
Aristarkh
My dear fellow, I'm afraid you still don't understand why you are killing yourself. Allow me to explain
Semyon
Go on
Aristarkh
You want to die for the truth, don't you?
Semyon
Yes
Aristarkh
And what is the truth?
Semyon
I don't know
Aristarkh
The circumstances of your life
The grinding poverty, your unemployment
Have led you to despair
Now these circumstances are a result
Of certain political and economical factors.
Who controls these factors?
Come on, Semyon, spit it out
(Prompting him) The g…
The gov…
Semyon
The government?
46
Aristarkh
Just to hear you say it sends a thrill right down my spine. Semyon, I can see the intelligence shining in your eyes. I know you want to die a meaningful, heroic death
Semyon
That does sound good
Aristarkh
It is good; a more magnificent death could not be found. But you must act quickly. Tear up this useless note and write another. Accuse them, blame them, speak your heart
Semyon
Blame the government?
Aristarkh
Yes – and defend us, the intelligentsia. And end by asking them the ultimate question: why has a loyal and sensitive citizen like Aristarkh Dominikovich Grand-Skubik not been employed in the construction of humane socialism?
Semyon
Who?
Aristarkh
Aristarkh Dominikovich Grand-Skubik
That's me
Sorry, didn't I say?
Semyon
You'll have to spell it for me
Aristarkh writes it down.
You are not employed either, sir?
Aristarkh
Not in the way I would wish. Semyon, when you have written this note, I will personally ensure that the bullet you shoot through your brain will be heard through all Russia
Semyon
But why would anyone be interested in me?
Aristarkh
Because you will have spoken!
Semyon
That simple?
47
Aristarkh
Speak and you're a hero. Men like me will honour you. Your name will become a slogan. I'll make sure that a portrait of your corpse – providing it's not too disfigured – will be on every front page. Russia's intelligentsia will gather round your coffin. Your hearse will be drowning in erudite tokens of respect
Semyon
What a death
Aristarkh
I would have such a death myself only, alas, I'm needed alive. So, are we agreed?
Semyon
A useful, courageous, meaningful death
Aristarkh
You need to compose your new suicide note, along the lines that I've suggested. Better still, I could write it – then you have only to sign your name and shoot yourself
Semyon
I'll write it myself, sir, if you don't mind
Aristarkh
And shall we arrange a time?
Semyon
A time?
Aristarkh
Would tonight at midnight suit you?
Semyon
Oh
Aristarkh
You are a true Russian hero and you are my equal. In the name of the intelligentsia, allow me to embrace you
I find myself overcome
I didn't cry when my mother died
Oh, my poor mother
But now
Now
Aristarkh sobs. Semyon comforts him.
Until midnight
Aristarkh exits, deeply moved.
48
Semyon
My name will be remembered
My life will have meant something
I'll give them the truth all right
They will have my truth in buckets
I will pour my blame all over Russia
I need paper
Serafima and Masha enter from Serafima's room. They are dressed to go out.
Where are you going?
Masha
Never you mind
Semyon
Are you leaving me?
Masha
None of your business
Semyon
Well, if you come back, will you bring me some paper?
Masha
Get your own
They exit down the stairs. Semyon shouts after her.
Semyon
It's not just the government, it's you!
The door slams.
My death will teach her to respect me
She will realise who she married then
My death will show them all my mettle
I am not a maggot. I am not a flea
And I am not alone
Alexander appears at the window with Kleopatra Maximovna, a striking young woman dressed in bohemian style. She is flushed with anticipation.
Alexander
Semyon –
Semyon
(opening the window) Have you got any paper, comrade?
49
Alexander
Paper? Waste of time. Got someone here who wants to meet you
Kleopatra
Hello
Alexander
Come on, girl, have a leg up
Kleopatra
Are you Semyon Semyonovich?
Pause. Semyon is gazing at her.
Alexander
Well, answer her, lad
Semyon
Oui
Alexander lifts Kleopatra through the window.
Kleopatra
I asked for a clandestine meeting
Semyon
C'est moi
Alexander
Kiki, the small fee I mentioned?
Kleopatra
Oh yes. This should cover it
Alexander
Clandestine is extra
Kleopatra
(reluctantly giving him some coins) Outrageous
Semyon
What are you doing, Alexander?
Alexander
What a friend should
He goes.
Kleopatra
I'm Kleopatra Maximovna
But people call me Kiki
Semyon
Bonjour, then
Kleopatra
I've heard about what you're going to do
Semyon
Have you?
Kleopatra
Are you fully committed? To die at your own hand?
Semyon
Yes
50
Kleopatra
How can you be so tragic and so brave? I have to beg you, I implore you, do not throw away your beautiful life
Semyon
Kiki –
Kleopatra
I plead upon my knees
I understand how you must be feeling
Semyon
Do you?
Kleopatra
Yours is not the only heart to succumb to pain. My own breast is a victim of it too. We are similar, Comrade Potsen… Podsek…
Semyon
Podsekalnikov. Semyon
Kleopatra
Semyon, my own breast burns with scorching flames
And sometimes the heat of my emotion is so raw
That I find myself crying out in solitary pain
With no one to hear me but an imaginary love,
'Now, now, end it all
I can't bear living with a heart this full.'
I'm a Romantic, you see
Semyon
That's nice
Kleopatra
And when I heard what you were doing – killing yourself in your youthful prime – I knew you must be a man of huge sensitivity. Are you a man of great soul?
Semyon
Yes
Kleopatra
I knew it. Men look at me and they just see a face, they see Kleopatra Maximovna; face, face, face, and when they pursue me they just want my body, they want to take my body and make love to it like a senseless thing, as if my body was just a body alone without a thinking, feeling soul, but Semyon, you wouldn't be like that, would you?
Semyon
No
51
During the following, Yegor leaves his room in his postman's uniform. He walks down the stairs, watching the scene.
Kleopatra
I've been a prisoner of my body all my life. I knew I was in trouble at fifteen, when my mother took me to buy shoes and the shop owner lost control of himself. The sight of my stockinged foot was too much for him and he sunk his teeth into my toe. It was just a little bite really, but my mother thought I had provoked him and she sent me away. From then I have limped from one man to another. There was my airplane pilot who said, 'Your body is my sun and my moon and without it, I am without light,' and when I left him he flew his plane over the city in spirals crying my name; then there was my communist who said my body was his Supreme Soviet – but he was nothing but a penile imperialist, and when I abandoned him he cursed me and left the Party; then there was the writer who called me his perfect muse and then said I drove him distracted; but none of them, none of them has ever truly found me, or owned me or even come close. All my life I've searched for the man who would understand my soul and now I think I've found him, found him in you, and it's too late – you are to die in this cruel way. You are to kill yourself
Semyon
Yes
But
Maybe not yet
Kleopatra
Semyon, I've come here to plead. You must end your life only for the purest of reasons
Listen to the turmoil in your soul. What is it telling you?
Semyon
Er –
Kleopatra
Look at my eyes. Take my hands. You're an aesthete, a prince of emotion. Don't resist, let the pain flow out of you
52
Semyon
Right
Kleopatra
Love is agony
Semyon
Yes
Kleopatra
Can you feel it? Here?
Semyon
Yes
Kleopatra
I knew it. You feel it. Don't kiss me – you're too pure
Semyon
Sorry
Kleopatra
Semyon, angel, I have only one favour to ask: if you are truly determined on this course of action – and how I revere you for it – then kill yourself for the one woman who appreciates the beauty of your soul. Kill yourself for Kleopatra, for Kiki and for love. I'll make a fool of myself at your funeral. My body will be useless for any other man. This is an age when love is despised; when it is trampled. How your death will change that. I will lead Russia's women as they sob upon your grave. We will carry your coffin on our fragrant shoulders. It will be you scorched on my heart for eternity, you I shall cherish to my grave. My remembrance will make you one of Russia's great lovers
Semyon notices Yegor.
Semyon
Can't you see this meeting is clandestine?
Yegor
You lucky sod
Semyon
Is nothing private in this house?
Yegor
This stairwell is a public thoroughfare
Semyon
I'm asking you nicely to leave
Yegor
And I am exercising my right / as a resident –
Semyon
Get out –
53
Yegor
As a resident and as a citizen / to be here
Semyon is rummaging for his gun.
Semyon
Yegor Timoveivich, I am armed and desperate and I don't care what I do
Yegor
You can't threaten me. My mettle was tested in the workers' civil war for freedom
Semyon shakily points the gun at Yegor.
Semyon
Please go away
Yegor
Have you got a permit for that?
Semyon
Sod off, you nosy bastard!
Yegor runs downstairs and exits. Meanwhile, Kleopatra is swooning at the sight of the gun.
Kleopatra
Semyon, I'm overcome. Hold me
Semyon
Kiki, hang on
Kleopatra
Listen to your heart
Semyon
I am. But I'm not free –
Kleopatra
We are both in chains
Kleopatra kisses him. He is dazzled.
Semyon
What do I have to do?
Kleopatra
I need your note. Write down the way you feel. I must have it in writing. Mention my name several times. Say you were overwhelmed – because you are overwhelmed, aren't you?
Semyon
Yes
Kleopatra
Say you despaired of ever being worthy. And then, after your death, my inconsolable grief will move a nation and your name, Semyon Semyonovich Paster…
54
Semyon
Podsekalnikov
Kleopatra
Yes – will never be forgotten
We hear Masha calling from downstairs.
Masha
Semyon? Semyon
Semyon
Shit on fire
Kleopatra
What is it?
Semyon
My
Oh God
It's the cook
Kleopatra
The cook?
Semyon
Quick –
Masha
Semyon?
Semyon
(to Masha) Get down to the kitchen and make me some soup
Masha
What?
Semyon
I said make me some soup
And an eggnog
Masha
Who do you think you're talking to?
I'm not your dog
Or your slave
You ungrateful bum
Semyon
Quick
Masha
After everything I said
To talk to me like that?
You pathetic turd
Kleopatra
What an uncouth person
Masha
I was all for getting straight on a train, but my mother said we should give you one more chance
55
Semyon
She sometimes brings her mother, who is vicious and a hag
Semyon is taking Kleopatra up to the landing.
Kleopatra
Let's defy her with our love. Kiss me
Semyon
No – look – please hide
Just for a minute
I'll get rid of her
We hear Masha calling down the street.
Masha
(off) Mother, he's still here
He hasn't done it yet – worst luck
Kleopatra
Where are you taking me, Semyon?
To your bedroom?
Semyon
No
Kleopatra
Oh, I am weak
My body is so weak
Semyon
Best go in the toilet then
Kleopatra
No, don't make me
I'm scared of toilets
I'm too sensitive
Semyon
Well, go in there then – quick
He bundles Kleopatra into Alexander's room. She is barely out of sight when Masha appears with Serafima.
Masha
(to Semyon) What are you doing up there?
Semyon
(grabbing his pants from the balcony) Pants!
Serafima
Prepare yourself, son
Semyon
What for?
Serafima
This is our last act of kindness towards you
Come on up, Father Yelpidy
56
Father Yelpidy enters: a man steeped in bitterness and alcohol. His thoughts, at this time of day, are usually as black as his robes.
Semyon
Oh, hairy Mary
I don't believe it
Yelpidy
I hear you're contemplating a mortal sin, boy
Semyon
Listen, Father,
I don't believe in God
Yelpidy
Well, believe in Him or not, He has no forgiveness for those who despair
Semyon
Then why did he create a world like this?
Yelpidy
He didn't. He gave us the Garden of Eden. We created this world through our own sinning natures
Semyon
Masha, I can't believe you've brought him here
Masha
I'm clutching at straws
Semyon
How could you do it?
Masha
Where else can I turn, Semyon?
Yelpidy
You don't believe in God; that's fine. But think of the horrible shock when you wake in your coffin and instead of rising up to Heaven your soul is pulled by clawing demons down to the murk of Hell. That'll be the moment that you realise He exists – when it's too late and He's abandoned you. Because, believe me, if you take your own life that is what will happen
Semyon
Great
Serafima
Watch your language in front of the priest, you dirty little boy
Alexander enters. On his way up to his room, he stops to listen. He is amused.
57
Yelpidy
Let me tell you, you'll suffer agonies so extreme they cannot be described. Imagine all your extremities being slowly fried while demons blow poison in your ears. Imagine the pain as it scalds and eats your brain. Imagine them peeling your blistered skin off and bursting your eyeballs with skewers. Imagine them raping you over and over with hot metal implements of every kind
Semyon
Oh for God's sake
Yelpidy
Yes, for God's sake! For God's sake it'll happen, for you are committing the foulest sin
Semyon
Will you get him out of here?
Serafima
He hasn't had his tea yet
He's not going until he's had his tea
Yelpidy
And do you have a little biscuit, Serafima Ilyinichna?
Serafima
I'll find you something tasty, Father
She runs down to the kitchen. Alexander is at his door.
Semyon
Alexander
Don't go in there
Alexander
Why not?
Semyon
Stay down here
Join in the fun
Alexander
No ta
Semyon
Wait – you're a sinner too. You're far worse than me. He can save us as a job lot
Alexander
I'm a Marxist
Semyon
So?
Alexander
Fuck off
He exits into his room. We hear Kleopatra squeal.
58
Masha
Who's up there?
Semyon
Mice
Yelpidy
Have you listened to anything I have said?
Semyon
Yes. You're enough to make anyone top themselves
Yelpidy
God hears your insolence
He hears all in these godless times
And he is storing up his vengeance
Masha
Father, is there a different tack you could try?
Yelpidy sighs. He sits.
Yelpidy
I should be used to ridicule and rejection by now but it always stings. I spread my pearls before swine every day and no one listens any more. Why do I bother? Why?
Semyon
I don't mean to be rude, Father, but I don't believe in God
Yelpidy
Then abandon hope. Kill yourself
Masha
Pardon?
Yelpidy
Go on ahead. Slice your throat, shoot yourself, throw a rope from that landing there and swing from it
Semyon
Right
Well, thanks
Yelpidy
Nothing I can do with a godforsaken suicide
(He is suddenly inspired.) Except
Will you be writing a note, boy?
Semyon
Yes
Yelpidy
Will you be mentioning despair?
Semyon
Don't know yet. Maybe
59
Yelpidy
Then give it to me. Let me read it to the people. Tell them how you turned your back on God. Say how I, Father Yelpidy, begged you to hear His word and save yourself. Tell them how you pushed me away. Then drink poison, blow your head off, drown yourself
Masha
Father, what are you saying?
Yelpidy
No other sermon I could preach would have more power
To turn the wayward millions back to God
The lesson of your terrible despair
The vision of your empty, godless universe
Will freeze men's hearts. Their terror
At your fate will rip desperate prayers
From out their mouths, like screams. Your suicide
Desolate boy, will fill my church
And I, Yelpidy, will gather my new flock
And nurture them within these humble robes
Semyon
So if I kill myself I'm doing it for God?
Yelpidy
He works in magnificent and enigmatic ways
Write your sad defiance down
And sign it with your wretched name.
Your lost soul might save ten thousand others
Serafima enters.
Serafima
Father, I poked around and found a little bit of meat. I know you'd rather have a biscuit but it's chicken-style stew
Yelpidy
You needn't go to trouble over me
Serafima
I've also got a little bit of this
She holds up a flask of vodka.
Yelpidy
The feast at Cana
Serafima
Come on down
60
Yelpidy
Think upon my words, young man. Repent and turn to God – or write that note
Yelpidy exits with Serafima.
Masha
I thought he'd speak more kindly
But he hasn't a drink yet I suppose
Semyon
What are you trying to do to me?
Masha
I'm trying to save your life
Semyon
Well, don't bother
Masha
I won't
Masha starts putting a few of her pathetic belongings in a bag. There are not many.
Semyon
Are you going, then?
Masha
Not hanging round here to be the weeping widow
Masha's bag is ready. She shuts it.
Semyon
Good luck, then
Masha
Thank you
Neither of them can move. They are verging on reconciliation.
Semyon
Mashenka
Masha
Yes?
Semyon
I –
Masha
Semyon
Semyon
I –
Margarita
(entering) Sorry to disturb you little turtle doves, but is Alexander Kalabushkin here?
Semyon
No, he's not
61
Masha
(puzzled) Yes, he is
Semyon
No, he's not
He just went out
Masha
No, he didn't
Margarita
I see. Who's he up there with?
Semyon
No one
No one, honest
Alexander's door opens. We see him with Kleopatra in the doorway.
Kleopatra
You barbarian
Alexander
Take a cold bath, love
Kleopatra
You savage. Your room smells like the cage of a beast. There's vodka on your breath
Your hands
Are huge
Alexander
I'm here later on if you want to get close
Kleopatra
Animal
Kleopatra runs downstairs. Alexander stays on his doorstep quietly laughing. He lights a cigarette. The sun is now setting.
Semyon, how could you force me to hide in there?
Semyon
Kiki
Margarita
(directly beneath Alexander) What slut are you chasing now?
Alexander
There's only one slut for me, Margarita
He winks at her and returns to his room, leaving the door open. Kleopatra throws her arms around Semyon, who is mortified.
62
Kleopatra
He is a blot on the world
And you, you are the bravest man
I've ever met I'll revere you for ever
Semyon
That's great, Kiki
Kleopatra
Remember my note
She releases him. Masha is disgusted.
Masha
'Kiki'?
Kleopatra
Is this your cook?
Semyon
Er –
Kleopatra
You should get her to sweep up. There's a lot of broken crockery around. Adieu
She blows him a kiss and leaves.
Masha
Your cook?
Semyon
Well –
Masha slaps him round the face.
Masha
Useless lying pig
She thumps him, then shoves him over. She storms up the stairs. She locks herself in the bathroom.
Margarita
Semyon Semyonovich
Semyon
Go away
Margarita
Come on now
It's just a little marital
It won't last
Semyon
I know
I'll be dead
Semyon starts to cry.
Margarita
Are you serious?
63
Margarita puts her arms around him and comforts him.
Oh come on, love, pick yourself up
Yegor enters. He slowly walks up to his room, watching and listening.
I've thought about ending it from time to time
When it just seems stupid going on
But I haven't got a bone in my whole body
That could harm itself.
You need to dig into adversity and grip it till it squeals
Because in doing that
You'll find out how strong you really are
Semyon
I want to make a difference in a way I can't alive
Margarita
Has Kalabushkin got you in this state with all his visitors?
Semyon
I never want to see the dawn on another day. Come midnight – bang
Margarita is shocked. Alexander has wandered out of his room again.
Alexander
(to Yegor) Have you no shame? Give him some privacy
Yegor
This is a public stairwell
Alexander
You're like a little rat, you
Peering out of corners at other people's lives
Haven't you got one of your own?
Yegor
Course I have. I live for the struggle
Alexander
Piss off
Yegor runs up to his room. Alexander now watches the scene. Semyon is drying his eyes.
64
Margarita
Well, if you're that set on it there's nothing I can say.
You'll be an ideological corpse all right, Semyon
And a very cute one
If you don't mind my saying
Semyon
At least I'll be a corpse
That's the main thing
Margarita
Well, what do you want to do, then?
If this is going to be your last night on Earth
We'd better make it special.
What d'you fancy?
Semyon
Don't know
Margarita
You tell Margarita
What would you like to do?
Semyon
Have a laugh?
Margarita
We'd better throw a party then
To see you on your way
Least they can do is raise you a glass
Hold off till midnight, yeah?
And who knows
You might wake up hungover in the morning
And decide that life's all right
Semyon nods. Margarita gets up. She notices Alexander.
Give Alexander Kalabushkin, a message from me
Tell him he's a goat and a pornographer
And a lumpen, savage beast
Tell him he's a worthless dog
And he's to come and help me carry all the booze
Alexander goes into his room. Yegor, seeing the coast is clear, immediately comes out of his room. He creeps down the stairs, watching.
65
You've a face like an icon, Semyon
It seems a shocking waste
Margarita kisses Semyon; a long kiss.
Midnight
She exits. Yegor tries the bathroom door.
Semyon
The zero hour
Between day and night
On the strike of twelve
On the final tock of the final tick
I'll leave through a gap into –
Semyon looks up to see Yegor peering through the keyhole.
Hey, pervert
That's my wife in there
Yegor
Semyon Semyonovich
I am looking through this keyhole from a Marxist point of view
There is nothing perverted about it
Masha comes out.
Masha
Yegor Timoveivich, do you see any worth in me?
Any value or beauty?
Yegor
Maria Lukianovna, you are so lovely
You are such a proper fine young woman
That when I pass you on the stairs
I often find myself looking away
Glancing aside in case I am dazzled
And occasionally when you smile at me
Or make a kind remark –
As you did when I got my People's Award
For Speed and Diligence in Postal Deliveries –
I find I am so moved I have to shut my eyes and breathe
Semyon
Unbelievable
66
Yegor
And the only way forward, then, is to see you from a Marxist point of view – when suddenly, you're safely drab and sexless
Masha
Thank you, Yegor
I'm going to the station now
Would you ask my husband to pass me my coat?
Yegor
Your wife would like her coat, comrade
Yegor hovers in the bathroom doorway, watching the scene. Semyon gets Masha's coat. She walks to him.
Masha
(to Semyon) Are you going to stop me?
Semyon
It's up to you
Semyon holds the coat out for her. Masha puts it on. Their eyes are locked throughout the following exchange.
Yegor
That unlicensed gun you pointed at me, comrade
Semyon
What about it? You going to fill in a form?
Yegor
Are you going to shoot yourself with it?
Semyon
I'm a man who doesn't care
Yegor
Well, I hope you're doing the decent thing
Semyon
What decent thing?
Alexander enters.
Yegor
You've got to do it for the Party. The Party needs you. People are losing their fervour now we're not in active revolution any more. There's something in the air, a sense of – I don't know – (He whispers.) Disillusionment
Alexander
(to Yegor) If you want to talk to him, you come through me, all right? You want to enter the lottery for his fate? It'll cost you five roubles
67
Yegor
Do it for the Party, Semyon. You owe them everything
Yegor, threatened, goes into the toilet and locks the door. Semyon and Masha are still staring at each other.
Semyon
You don't believe I'll do it, do you? You don't think I'm man enough
Masha
Goodbye
Masha leaves. The light is beginning to fade into dusk.
Alexander
Call her back
Semyon hangs his head. Alexander comes downstairs.
I reckon that means you're serious. You'd better have this, then
He puts a handful of banknotes into Semyon's hand.
Semyon
What's this?
Alexander
About twenty roubles. Least I can do, mate
Semyon
Where did you get it?
Alexander
Five roubles for a personal meeting – clandestine extra – and three for a written suggested cause
Semyon
What?
Alexander
Here are your written suggested causes. This is from Pugachev the butcher: 'Do it for meat'
Semyon
What's going on?
Alexander
Here's one from Raisa Filipovna – great stomach on her. Biceps like a poster girl
Semyon
Who are these people?
Alexander
She says, 'Semyon Semyonovich, bla bla bla… sacrifice yourself for the sexual emancipation of all68 Russian women…' (Handing the letter to Semyon.) If you fancy it
Semyon
What are you talking about?
Alexander
(looking at the next) Viktor Viktorovich – he's a writer. He's actually paid to meet you but I haven't fitted him in yet. He goes on and on and on about samovars and troikas and broken guitar strings. Basically, he hasn't got a cause; he just wants to write about you once you're dead. Look through the rest at your leisure
Alexander hands the rest of the letters to Semyon.
Semyon
What is all this money for?
Alexander
Whatever you like. It's poverty that's bought you to this. So I thought I'd alleviate your poverty
Semyon is moved.
Semyon
Thank you, comrade, but
I've no use for it
Alexander is disappointed.
Alexander
Have it anyway
Semyon
You really did this for me?
Alexander
I took a massive cut, obviously
Semyon
People really paid you?
Alexander
Yes
Semyon
Like I'm somebody important?
Alexander
Well, you are. You're a fucking hero to them. Nice idea of Margarita's, throwing you a party. You've got to hand it to her, haven't you? She's a classy tart
Semyon
You're a pornographer
Alexander
And a goat. I'll go and help her with the booze
69
Alexander moves away. Semyon opens one of the notes. He reads.
Semyon
'Comrade Podsekalnikov
Shoot and your soul flies out of its cage
Like a wild bird on the wind.
Hosanna, it will cry; hosanna…'
Alexander
(stopping) Oh yes, I didn't charge him
I didn't feel I could
He's got no legs
Or fingers
And he's blind
I had to write it down for him
Alexander exits.
Semyon
(reads) 'God calls to you, like he calls to all
The lost and those tormented in the mind
Break the bonds of pain that hold you here
We will exalt you
Hosanna
We are the only voice of truth on Russia's streets
Do it for us, your brethren in the gutter
Do it for the beggars
And the mad.'
Semyon stands alone in the fading light.
He stares into the darkness, a look of determination growing on his face.
Midnight.
Guests have assembled in Semyon's dingy living space: Margarita, Serafima, Alexander, Aristarkh, Kleopatra and Father Yelpidy. Semyon has been covered in streamers and confetti. Everyone is singing. Two Beggar-Musicians play. Candlelight and gas lamps light the scene. Huge shadows.
All
To us has come our very own
Semyon Semyonovich
Dear Semyon, Semyon,
Semyon, Semyon, Semyon
Drink, drink, drink, drink
Semyon drink it up
Margarita hands Semyon one of his last remaining cups, filled with wine.
Drink, drink, drink, drink, Semyon drink it up!
Semyon drains the cup.
Semyon
Can I afford to replace it? Who cares?
He smashes it. The guests cheer wildly.
Kleopatra
What a man
Aristarkh
Such proletarian passion
Alexander
You're a fucking hero, Semyon
Serafima
That's why we all love you, darling. Father Yelpidy has explained why you're doing what you're doing and I must say I'm impressed. I never thought you had such strong religious feeling in you
71
Yelpidy
(to Kleopatra) Have you heard the one about the monk in the bath house?
Kleopatra
Don't talk to me about monks. I don't like smut
Yelpidy
Ah go on, you do
Semyon gives the Beggar-Musicians a handful of notes. Alexander notices. It troubles him.
Semyon
Thanks for that, lads. You keep playing
They do so.
Serafima
It's only a pity my fool of a daughter isn't here to support you. I ran to the station looking for her but she was gone. And it's the first opportunity you've ever given her to be proud of you
Semyon turns away.
Yelpidy
I just want to say, brethren, comrades, this young man's death will have an impact on every Russian
Aristarkh
You are quite correct. Semyon Semyonovich is a catalyst
Serafima
Don't be disgusting
Yelpidy
Here's to him
Alexander
Speech! Speech! Tell them how you're feeling, Semyon. And tell them whose note you're going to run with
Aristarkh
The note is not the important thing
Kleopatra
Speech!
The other guests join in, calling Semyon to speak. Semyon falters. Pause.
Semyon
What time is it?
Aristarkh
Ten to midnight
72
Margarita
It's nowhere near. You've got all the time in the world
Yegor enters. He is followed by Viktor Viktorovich, an intense, defensive poet in his early thirties. Semyon seizes his entrance with relief.
Semyon
Well, look who's here!
To us has come our very own
Yegor Oh-what's-his-name?
The Beggar-Musicians start to play. Alexander joins in, singing.
Alexander
Dear Yegor, Yegor
Yegor, Yegor, Yegor
Drink, drink, drink, drink
Yegor drink it up
Margarita hands Yegor a bottle. He drinks.
All
Drink, drink, drink, drink, Yegor drink it up!
Yegor
Thank you, comrades. I don't usually take alcohol
But I like it when people drink to me –
As they did when I won my People's Award
Semyon
This man has won a People's Award
What do you say to that, people?
He is a model fucking postman
And a very handy man with the ladies
Isn't that right, Yegor?
Yegor
Well, I'll try to deny it, Semyon Semyonovich
Semyon
You wouldn't be believed
Viktor
(coming from the shadows) You are Semyon Semyonovich?
Semyon is startled. He cries out.
May I shake your hand?
73
He shakes Semyon's hand. Semyon is looking at him as if he is a ghost.
Yegor
This man was on the doorstep, looking for you
Viktor
(with a black look at Alexander) I had been promised a meeting and I was worried that the sands of time would run out before we'd had a chance to speak
Semyon
Who are you? What do you want?
Viktor
I'm Viktor Viktorovich. You might have heard of me; I've been published in seven different publications. I'm the people's poet
Kleopatra
The people's pest
Viktor
Kiki
Kleopatra
The people's pipsqueak
Viktor
You must be here looking for a new victim
Semyon
She's my guest; the only woman who cares two kopeks for me
Serafima
I care
Kleopatra
Be warned, Semyon Semyonovich
Viktor
Yes, be warned
Kleopatra
Viktor Viktorovich is not a true poet. He loves only the body and not the soul
Viktor
May I speak? (To Semyon) Comrade, in my humble career as a highly regarded, controversial writer, I've written extensively about the character of the Russian: so resilient, so often called upon to endure the unendurable. That this character has cracks is deeply moving to me. And I think you embody those cracks
Yegor
The character of the Russian has been created by historical materialism. How can it have cracks? It simply is
74
Semyon
I don't want to offend you or anything, but with you coming in all dressed in black, I thought –
Viktor
What?
Semyon
Just for a second in the gloom
I thought I was already dead
Kleopatra
Yes, he does look a bit sepulchral,
A bit grim-reaperish, doesn't he?
Poor Viktor, you ought to get out in the daylight more
Viktor
You know nothing, Kiki, nothing
Kleopatra
You're like a poor little wilted plant. You need light
Viktor
Semyon Semyonovich
We artists have become red slaves in the proletariat's harem
Aristarkh
You're misquoting
Viktor
We sit in the state and we write fanfares
Drum rolls for the new elite
Well, I want to be Tolstoy
Not a drummer
I would regard it as an honour
If you would let me write your obituary –
If it were printed alongside your note
I guarantee you it would make the strongest statement
I can craft words
That will awaken the dullest minds
Transform the hardest hearts
Aristarkh
And tire the keenest intellects
Semyon
You can write what you like; I won't be here. Can I get some more of that booze?
Margarita
You'll laugh about this in the morning, love
Semyon
I'm laughing now
75
Yegor
I'm fed up reading things about the Russian character, as if we're still peasants painted on a biscuit tin. I'm a postman, right? And I want to read about postmen
Viktor
I've written about foundry workers
Yegor
Then let the foundry workers read it
I want to read about postmen, do you get it?
The postman's toils
His heavy load, his beating heart
Kleopatra
Well that's an audience of one
Yegor
There are ten thousand thousand postmen in this Soviet Union, lady. And not one of us has a crack
Aristarkh
Ladies and gentlemen –
Yegor
And people
Aristarkh
We are here to accompany Semyon Semyonovich to… dare one say 'the next world' in these secular times?
Yelpidy
It is with the profoundest respect that we gather today –
Semyon
I'm not dead yet
Aristarkh
No, no, my dear friend, we are merely paving the way
Semyon
I've got something to ask you, all of you. What is there after?
Aristarkh
Well, obviously there's a lavish funeral with invitations to all our premier citizens; graveside orations from myself and other interested parties –
Semyon
I don't mean for you, I mean for me
Aristarkh
For you?
My dear boy
76
Semyon
Is there life after death? That's what I'm asking. Is there anything out there after this?
Pause.
Aristarkh
Well, Father, I rather think this might be one for you
Yelpidy
God, I hate that question. I'd rather tell a joke
Alexander
Yes, tell a joke
Margarita
Let's have a bit of life before death
Yelpidy
One night, after a long day's godless theorising, Marx and Hegel decided to go to a knocking shop
Yegor
You cannot joke about them
Yelpidy
Why not?
Yegor
Because communism isn't funny
Alexander
I've got a joke. A young man with no money and no prospects decides to end his life –
Semyon
I need an answer!
Yelpidy
Well, of course there's life after death
Semyon
You look as if you want to say 'but'
Yelpidy
But
Well
You know
Now
Your corpse will be water for the great mill of life, that's all we can say. Fill me up there now, Margarita
Margarita
It'll make you a lion in the pulpit
Yelpidy
And a lamb in your bar
Viktor
I'll tell you what your corpse will be
77
Kleopatra
His corpse is not important
Viktor
What's important is what will remain
Semyon
What will remain?
Viktor
The worm
And that is where your power is, Semyon Semyonovich
The worm toils eternally
The worm crawls out and starts to gnaw
Margarita
Come on, lads, keep playing
Alexander
Let's have a fucking tune
Margarita
This is supposed to be a party
The Beggar-Musicians play.
Semyon
Wait!
The worm
What does it gnaw on, comrade?
Viktor
Let's say it starts with the weakest, with the little men, the model workers, the Party ants and the splendid types, those who have never thought, but have a sort of sadness in them –
Kleopatra
Shut up
Viktor
The hollow ones, the empty ones. I'm saying this to comfort you. You will put your worm in them. And how your worm will multiply
Kleopatra
We could get you cremated
Margarita
Drink
Aristarkh
Dear Semyon, many tempestuous and passionate young heads will turn towards the path you are treading. And their fathers will weep without end, and their mothers will cry over their graves and our great homeland will start to shake and the gates of the Kremlin78 will open wide and our government will come out to us. And we will stand hand in hand, the landowner with the peasant, and – I'm sorry – I didn't cry when my mother died
Alexander
So anyway, this young man resolves to top himself
But he can't decide on a cause
Semyon
Are you laughing at me?
Alexander
/No
Kleopatra
You must try and send us back messages. We could contact you. I could be your vessel. You could move little household objects from place to place
Margarita
Drink
Kleopatra
Then your influence would continue from beyond the grave. That's the kind of man you are, Semyon; your soul will never die
Semyon
You're right
Drink to me, comrades
Drink to Semyon, friends
Drink, you bastards, drink
The company drinks, shouting Semyon's name. Semyon and Alexander start a wild dance. The music becomes frenzied. All the others join in.
Aristarkh
Semyon Semyonovich, hero of our times. Alone, with a pistol in his hand, he starts out on the great road of Russian history
Viktor
Let those who walk this road into the future stumble on his corpse
Yegor
To the people
Alexander
May you live for ever, mate
79
The Beggar-Musicians finish to loud applause and cheers. Semyon gives them more of his roubles.
Semyon
Take it, lads
Alexander
What are you doing? That's ten roubles
Semyon
They can have it
Alexander
Don't give them your money
Semyon
I'm about to die
Alexander
Semyon, listen to me. / It's gone far enough
Semyon
(turning from him) People, listen
Margarita
(to Alexander) Leave him. He'll come round
Semyon
My life is just beginning as it ends
Viktor
Speech – he makes a final speech
Semyon
I am about to end my life. So who's to blame? All of them. They do not know that I exist. But I shall get them on the telephone. I'll phone them and I'll tell them –
Aristarkh
Sorry, phone who?
Semyon
The Kremlin. I'll telephone the Kremlin and I'll tell them my name and I'll say openly that I, Semyon Semyonovich Podsekalnikov, have read Marx and I didn't think much of him
There are shocked intakes of breath in the room.
I thought he was boring
More shocked intakes of breath.
Then I'll ask to speak to the bloke at the top
Not just anyone; I'll get the top bloke
And I'll tell him, telephone to telephone, that he can
Listen out for when I'm dead
And when I'm dead I'll say such things –
80
Shit on fire
How can I say anything?
I haven't written my note
Viktor
Dictate it, comrade
Aristarkh
Excellent idea. Time is ticking on
Viktor
I am poised
Pause.
Semyon
You're so good to me, all of you, coming here
I am a man alone and you have shown me that
You care about me, all of you Look at you
You care about my words, my thoughts
And to my surprise, dear comrades
I find that I am not afraid
My fear has gone
Yes, I'm going to die
And for the first time in my life
I'm completely unafraid
I feel a power growing in me
Like a blaze in my head
There are two hundred million of us
In this Union of Soviets
A huge mass of masses
And I'm the only one
Not cowering in fear
I'm going to die
Hold me down before I start to fly
To think I finally have power
I can do anything, anything
Hold me back
I'm a colossus, I am Caesar
You will see me everywhere
And I'm doing this for us
For all of us
81
This is me, Semyon, truly me
Shit your pants, you, cowering in the Kremlin
I am the arrow of disillusionment
The meaning of me
Will terrify you
I matter
I matter
I am a boy genius
I am what I always could have been
My life will not insult me
I will not have lived a mockery
Today, tonight, this minute
This second of slippery time
My turn has come
I am
I am
The clock begins to strike twelve. A deathly hush. Viktor finishes scribbling. Semyon takes Viktor's page. He signs his name.
Semyon Semyonovich Podsekalnikov
He picks up his gun. He takes his bottle, holding it up to the company.
Life, I challenge you
He bows. He exits. Silence.
A round of stunned applause from the company – apart from Alexander and Margarita.
Yegor
He told them to shit their pants
He said it
He told the Kremlin to shit their pants
Kleopatra
My love, my beautiful love
I love him, I really do
Look at me, I'm feeling
82
Alexander
(to Margarita) I'll follow him
Margarita
(to Alexander) He won't do it
Viktor
'This second of slippery time'
Aristarkh
'Arrow of disillusionment'
Viktor
Can you believe he came out with that?
Margarita
Faced with the cold barrel of the gun he won't be able
Aristarkh
This boy; a starving proletarian. What unexpected quality
Serafima
He's not really going to do it, is he?
Yelpidy
We should pray
Aristarkh
You pray
Yelpidy
Father
Pause.
Yegor
Where is it?
Yelpidy
What?
Yegor
The gunshot
Pause. The feeling of discomfort grows until it is almost unendurable.
Aristarkh
My brother-in-law
Has sat in jail
For five years now
Kleopatra
There is another
Wonderful splendid life
Somewhere
Serafima
What am I feeling? Will somebody tell me what I'm supposed to be feeling?
83
Margarita
He won't do it
Alexander
We are all worthless dogs
Margarita
I tell you he won't be able
Serafima
He'll walk back in any minute, won't he?
Margarita
He'll look back on this when he's an old man
Alexander
It's gone far enough
Alexander exits, following Semyon.
Semyon
Pause. We hear a distant gunshot.
Reactions range from stricken (Serafima) to relieved (Aristarkh).
Aristarkh shakily pours himself a glass.
Aristarkh
To Semyon Semyonovich Podsekalnikov
He made his choice
Yelpidy
May he rest in peace
They drink. Aristarkh brutally smashes his glass.
Back at the zoo. Ivan/CROCODILE is on his knees, singing, swinging his arms. There's a tube next to him now.
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, I'm a happy little, snappy little crocodile, I've long green tail and bright-white smile, I'm a wizard little lizard with a sense of style, I'm a funky little crocodile! Yes, ma'am, I'm a hunky little crocodile…
Thank you! Thank you very much!
Ivan bows, and milks the crowd for a round of applause. A photographer, Sasha Ivkin (Popov in a fedora) runs on from stage left with an old-fashioned, daguerreotype camera.
39
Sasha
Croc? Yes, mate, this way!
Ivan tries to face Sasha for the purposes of a photo. Zack and Anya enter, jostling through some of the audience.
Zack
Excuse me… sorry… Ivan!
Sasha
You'll get your go in a minute…
Zack
No, we're his friends…
Sasha takes some more photos.
Anya
I actually used to go out with him.
Zack
Yeah, I mean that's not, why are you bringing that up?
Sasha looks at her and then lines up a photo.
Sasha
Can I get a quick photo?
Anya
Oh, yes of course…
Anya poses for the camera.
Zack
Well… I mean, why?
Ivan/Crocodile
Zack! That you?
Zack
Yes, Ivan, are you alright?
Ivan/Crocodile
Yeah, yeah, couple of journos came down and it's gone absolutely nuts!
Zack
I mean, in there? Are you okay?
Ivan/Crocodile
Yeah, fine. It's actually not that bad. I mean, it stinks like a box of bums, but it's fairly comfy.
Sasha 's got his photo of Anya.
Sasha
Cheers then, Croc!
Ivan/Crocodile
Anytime, brother!
Sasha leaves. Anya bounds over.
Anya
Oh my God… all these people, Ivan!
Ivan/Crocodile
Anne! Hey! I know, right!
40
Anya
What's with the 'Croc' thing? Have they given you a name already?
Ivan/Crocodile
I know, yeah! They're calling me The Crocodile Man or Croc. Or I actually came up with The Croc Monsieur, like the French toastie they do in Kemenov's –
Anya
Oh, that's clever –
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, it's pretty long-ball but some of the interviewers have enjoyed it –
Anya
Interviews! Oh wow, Ivan!
Ivan/Crocodile
Done two so far, yeah. Lovely, lovely people these journos, honestly.
Zack
Okay, well, the police are being really difficult, and are basically refusing to do anything about it –
Ivan/Crocodile
Uh-huh, cool.
Zack
So I think I should get a vet, ask them to sedate the crocodile maybe, while we try and get you out –
Ivan/Crocodile
Yeah, could you get me a coffee?
Zack
Sorry, what?
Ivan/Crocodile
A coffee.
Zack
How does that… are you drinking coffee now?
Ivan/Crocodile
There's a pipe, look. Popov's rigged up a tube thing that goes into the croc's mouth and then we both get some. He's actually being pretty great – I think I got him wrong before –
Zack
Yeah, I'm sure he's doing fairly well out of all this –
Ivan/Crocodile
Just a coffee with a wee bit of cream… it'll help me sing.
Zack
Yeah, the singing's not a priority –
Anya
I'll get it, Ivan! That's no problem –
Ivan/Crocodile
Thanks, my darlin'. Popov'll give you some cash –
41
Anya
Okay, great, and well done again on all these people, Ivan.
Ivan/Crocodile
Cheers, Anne.
Zack
'Well done'?
Anya
It's really amazing.
Anya pops off.
Zack
I don't think you should be singing and dancing, Ivan –
Ivan/Crocodile
It's just a bit of fun, Zack –
Zack
But you might dislodge yourself, slip further down into the gut or something –
Ivan/Crocodile
Yeah, no, that's fine, I've now secured myself in a wodge of veins.
Zack
Mm. And, to be honest, Ivan, it's all, you know, quite disturbing.
Ivan/Crocodile
What? What is?
Zack
Making the crocodile dance like that. You can't see what it looks like but, it's, from out here, freakish –
Ivan/Crocodile
People are loving it, mate.
Zack
I really think you should just keep still until I get a vet –
Ivan/Crocodile
There's really no rush, buddy. It's pretty peaceful in here, to be honest, in a womby kind of way –
Zack
Okay, even so –
Ivan/Crocodile
And I've made a bit more space by sort of elbowing his innards around a bit and punching my way into his arms. Hence the dancing.
He moves the crocodile's arms.
Zack
Oh, God, Ivan, please stop it, it's genuinely quite disturbing.
42
Ivan/Crocodile
Should have the legs going soon. I just need to stamp some of the pulpy stuff down into the feet to free up some space.
Zack
Yes. And how are you… going to the toilet and stuff?
Ivan/Crocodile
Just doing it in here, yeah. It's not ideal, but I'm hoping he's going to… process it for me, in some way –
Zack
Right, yeah, Ivan, this is awful –
Ivan/Crocodile
It's a real eye-opener though, Zack. Being in here. I'm getting some great thinking done. You get a unique perspective on life from the inside of a crocodile, lad. I'm absolutely percolating with ideas.
Zack
Yeah, I can imagine –
Ivan/Crocodile
About life, death, animals, shows, obviously, economics, the lot. I'm finding it a very fertile atmosphere for cooking up some pretty major thoughts, which I do want to make sure I see through.
Zack
Meaning what?
Ivan/Crocodile
Meaning I'm getting a lot out of it. Artistically. And, being vulgar for a second, financially. Popov's charging thirty-five roubles to get in here now, thanks to little old me –
Zack
What? Thirty-five roubles?
Ivan/Crocodile
And he's giving me half, which, obviously, I'd rather not take, but it has been tough for me recently, cheese-and-turnip-wise, so –
Zack
That feels like a lot of money, Ivan –
Ivan/Crocodile
Thanks, yeah –
Zack
To be charging I mean –
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh, it's free for you and Anne, don't worry, you're on my VIP list. Point is, people are paying, and they're staying. And they're loving it, so… don't get the vet. Yet.
43
Zack
They're not loving it, Ivan, they're just gawping at you.
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, who knows…?
Zack
They're rubbernecking. This isn't dignified, it's a… freak show. There's a man in a crocodile, that's why they're here.
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, that's obviously the headline news, yes, but the songs are going down a total storm –
Zack
But they're are, aren't they, crap?
Ivan/Crocodile
I need to thank you for that in fact. It was only you mentioning the songs I did with Anne that gave me the idea. The crowd are lapping it up, mate. Like hot… dogs.
Zack
Yes because, and I can't emphasise this enough, you're in a crocodile –
Ivan/Crocodile
Once I get the old legs going, I'll really be able give them a show.
Zack
It doesn't matter what you do, Ivan, just carry on drinking and shitting in there and they'll still be writing about it.
Ivan/Crocodile
I haven't done one of those yet actually!
Zack
Okay, good.
Ivan/Crocodile
I've been holding it in for his sake.
Zack
That'll go down just as well as those stupid songs.
Ivan/Crocodile
I know the songs are stupid, Zack, I know that! They're meant to be stupid, so they're actually therefore clever.
Zack
Right. That's lucky –
Ivan/Crocodile
Nevertheless, this is an opportunity for me. Being in here. Which I have to take. Career-wise.
Zack
You want to be a singing crocodile now? That's your new career plan?
Ivan/Crocodile
It's now or never, Zack, I'm thirty-two, I can't keep doing my shows to no one, it's not healthy –
44
Zack
Yes, I know. I told you that.
Ivan/Crocodile
The songs are just the beginning! They just lure 'em in. Once I've done that, once I've got them looking, I hit them with the good stuff. Where it hurts. Get all of Russia to hear what I have to say. Show people what the Tsar's doing to us here… free their tiny minds!
Zack
Yeah, I'm going to get a vet –
Ivan/Crocodile
No, Zack, listen –!
Ivan grabs his arm. Zack screams.
Zack
That's really fucking creepy!
Ivan/Crocodile
And calm down! I have to stay in here, mate. For the art. For the message. This crocodile is my way to get that out. It's much bigger than me. In more ways than one.
Zack
Please let go of my arm, Ivan, this is absolutely appalling –
Ivan/Crocodile
Being eaten by a crocodile could the best thing that ever happened to my career, Zack, and I honestly never thought I'd say that. Please do not get a vet. For one thing they're famously pricey.
Zack
Let my go of my fucking arm, I'm going to have a panic attack!
Ivan/Crocodile does so. Mr Frampton (Popov in a bowler hat) waddles over. He starts hitching up a banner behind him. It's for Petersham Tweed Jackets.
Mr Frampton
Ivan, hi! Andrew Frampton.
Ivan/Crocodile
Sorry?
Mr Frampton
Andrew Frampton. Owner of this here zoo. Really wonderful to meet you.
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh, yeah, I've heard all about you.
Mr Frampton
Well, likewise! Yes!
(To Zack.) Sorry, can you give us a sec?
45
Zack
Oh, I'm actually –
Ivan/Crocodile
He's with me, Frampton.
Mr Frampton
Oh right, yes, great.
Zack
I'm Zack.
Mr Frampton
Perfect. Andrew Frampton. Well, look, Ivan, I wanted to come down to personally introduce myself and say a big hello and thank you for everything you're doing for the zoo in terms of the sheer 'being inside a crocodile' factor. It's really just wonderful stuff from our point of view and, well, I'm sure I don't need to tell you how much it's captured the public's imagination.
Ivan/Crocodile
I'm as humbled by it as you are.
Mr Frampton
Well, exactly. And I thought I should let you know that everyone in the office is a huge fan of everything you're doing.
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, that's lovely to hear.
Zack
What's that banner?
Mr Frampton
Sorry?
Zack
Why have you just put up a banner for Petersham Tweed Jackets?
Mr Frampton
Yes, no, I know I have, that's, I was going to say: good news! We've got sponsorship!
Ivan/Crocodile
What? Have we?
Mr Frampton
From Petersham's. I've got connections at Petersham's.
Ivan/Crocodile
I'm not cool with that, Frampton.
Mr Frampton
Oh well, uh, they are sponsoring the whole zoo, not just you –
Ivan/Crocodile
Like hell they are, mate. I'm the reason people are coming –
46
Mr Frampton
Well, of course, you are a very popular attraction, but there are many other, the penguins are –
Ivan/Crocodile
No one gives a shit about the penguins, Frampton. They can get penguins anywhere.
Mr Frampton
Well, that's… geographically naive and, well, the penguins are a real favourite here –
Ivan/Crocodile
Why is the banner not behind the penguins then?
Mr Frampton
Yes, no, I know. And, look, it is a nice bit of investment, so it will of course mean that we're now more financially able to help with your comfort and overall well-being –
Ivan/Crocodile
I'm not doing free advertising, Frampton. For you and your pals back in Blighty. This is Russia, mate, you can't just turn up here with your bags of swag you've wrung out of oily faced northern factory workers and start flogging all your clobber from your Crystal Palace –
Mr Frampton
Well, no, it's not like that –
Ivan/Crocodile
Who's the banner for, Zack?
Zack
Petersham Tweed Jackets.
Ivan/Crocodile
Never heard of them.
Mr Frampton
They make hacking jackets. I gather from Popov that you're wearing one.
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh. Yes, I am.
Mr Frampton
So I telegrammed a uni chum in London and he was absolutely thrilled that you like them…
Ivan/Crocodile
Right, well, I mean, I do –
Mr Frampton
I've got one myself actually.
Ivan/Crocodile
The workmanship is excellent –
Mr Frampton
Oh, look, it's unbeatable. And no one said anything about this being free, by the way, we want to keep47you, the talent, absolutely happy, so obviously, if there is anything you'd like from Petersham Tweed Jackets then you should say at once –
Ivan/Crocodile
Can I have a Petersham Tweed Jacket?
Mr Frampton
Yes, of course.
Zack
Well, what's the point of that?
Ivan/Crocodile
There are other colours, I expect –
Mr Frampton
Oh, many, yes –
Ivan/Crocodile
There you go –
Zack
No, I mean, when you're in a crocodile –
Mr Frampton
And they also make top hats, waistcoats and cravats.
Zack
Which, again, not that useful –
Ivan/Crocodile
And are they ethical, Frampton? As company? Do you know?
Mr Frampton
Uh… I know they make tweed.
Ivan/Crocodile
Sounds fine. I'll have all that stuff then –
Mr Frampton
Superb! They'll be so excited.
Ivan/Crocodile
If it means there's more funding going to the upkeep of the animals, then it's my pleasure…
Mr Frampton
Fantastic. Thanks so much for being so reasonable, Ivan –
Ivan/Crocodile
No problem at all, Frampton.
Mr Frampton
And wonderful again to meet you –
Ivan/Crocodile
Yeah, could you get me some food?
Mr Frampton
Oh. Yes. What sort of…?
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, something that can fit down the tube so maybe…
Zack
Soup?
48
Ivan/Crocodile
Caviar, I was going to say.
Zack
Caviar?
Ivan/Crocodile
Bit of caviar maybe. Just cos it's small, isn't it?
Mr Frampton
It is, yes. It's eggs.
Zack
Do you like caviar?
Ivan/Crocodile
I reckon I would, yeah. Probably good for the croc's stomach too, I expect, a bit of Beluga caviar…
Mr Frampton
Yes, that's… that is the most expensive one.
Ivan/Crocodile
Great.
Mr Frampton
Okay, great.
Ivan/Crocodile
Thanks.
Mr Frampton
Well no thank you, thanks so much again for choosing our zoo to… get into a crocodile in –
Ivan/Crocodile
You're welcome –
Zack
I don't think he chose it.
Mr Frampton
And nice to meet you too. There.
Zack
Zack.
There is shouting offstage. Anya appears at the side of the stage, by the tinsel, holding a coffee, distressed.
Anya
It's for Ivan! It's for the Croc! I'm not pushing in!
Zack
Anya!
(To Frampton.) Sorry, can you, she's meant to be on a VIP list.
Frampton goes over to Anya and shouts to people offstage.
Mr Frampton
She is a friend of Croc's! Please calm down! You will all get your chance to see him, just… I don't care how disabled you are, you do have to wait, sir…
49
Anya
I've got a coffee for Ivan.
Mr Frampton
Yes. Please do come in.
He lets her through the tinsel. Anya heads over.
Zack
Are you alright?
Anya
A couple of people spat in my hair cos they thought I was barging in.
Zack
Oh my God!
Ivan/Crocodile
Did any of it go in the coffee?
Anya
No, I managed to shield it.
Ivan/Crocodile
Good girl, Anne! Be a love and pop it in the pipe. I'm gasping.
Anya
There was an old man back there who said he knew you, actually, Ivan.
Ivan/Crocodile
What? Who was that?
Anya
With a couple of limps.
Ivan/Crocodile
Mr Poborsky! Let him through! Frampton! Send in Poborsky!
Mr Frampton
Right, yes, which one's Poborsky?
Frampton exits. Mr Poborsky (Popov in a fur hat ) limps onstage very slowly. He carries a small dog (stuffed, probs).
Mr Poborsky
Ivan! I came as quickly as I could!
Ivan/Crocodile
Mr Poborsky! Have you seen what's happened? People are finally listening! Isn't it wonderful?
Mr Poborsky
Mm… I preferred the old stuff.
Beat. Ivan/CROCODILE wasn't expecting this. Sour atmosphere.
Ivan/Crocodile
Yup, let's lose Poborsky! Frampton!
He switches hats to become Frampton again, heads out.
50
Mr Frampton
Right, come on, off you go then…
Ivan/Crocodile
Miserable old bastard.
(To Anya.) Coffee please, Anne.
Anya
Yes, sorry, Ivan, one sec.
She starts to pour it into the tube. Zack sidles over to her.
Zack
I'm so sorry they spat at you…
Anya
Huh? Yeah, yeah, it's all a bit crazy, isn't it?
Zack
I know, it's absurd. I can't wait to just get out of here –
Anya
There are touts outside selling tickets for three hundred roubles!
Zack
Yes. Exactly. So I've booked a table at Benoit's tonight…
Ivan/Crocodile
Bit slower, Anne, my love!
Anya
Sorry, Ivan.
Anya carries on pouring the coffee. Half-listening.
Zack
For seven thirty. I know you've been wanting to go…
Anya
Yes. Sorry, who?
Zack
No, what? It's a restaurant. Benoit's. The French place. You mentioned. It was starred, it's meant to be… starred.
Anya
Oh right?
Zack
For tonight. That's… is that okay?
Anya
Yeah, just, obviously, if we leave we may not be able to get back in.
Zack
Well… so?
Anya
So everyone's desperate to get in here, Zack.
Zack
Yeah but, that's not a reason to do it, I mean, I've booked the table, Anya, I've, we're apparently by a window. In a good way.
51
She's poured all the coffee now.
Anya
Finished, Ivan!
Ivan/Crocodile
Thanks, Anne. Don't know what I'd do without you.
Anya
If there's anything else you want, just shout at me.
Zack leads her away from the crocodile. Frampton comes in and starts spooning caviar into the tube.
Zack
Anya, don't… encourage him, okay?
Anya
What do you mean?
Zack
This is obviously, for someone like Ivan, going to have an impact, and we need to protect him a bit –
Anya
What? What do you mean 'someone like Ivan'?
Zack
Well, for someone as… dramatic and, Ivan's a massive show-off, Anya, this is right in his wheelhouse –
Anya
No, he's not, he's an actor –
Zack
I, yes, exactly –
Anya
And performance artist –
Zack
Yeah, again, fine, I don't really know what that is, I'm just saying, this whole circus really isn't going to help –
Anya
It's not a circus, it's a zoo –
Zack
It, I know, I mean, given what we decided last night, we need to make sure that all this doesn't, you know, derail that. For Ivan's sake.
Anya
So what if it does? Maybe this changes things –
Zack
It, no, it can't –
Anya
This is a break for him, Zack – a weird one sure, but they all count. You've got to grab 'em when you get 'em, that's how this industry works –
Zack
But it's not just about breaks, though, is it? That's not why we all decided to intervene –
52
Anya
You said he was destitute and weeing in the sink –
Zack
Yes, and he is, but –
Anya
That's why you suggested it.
Behind him, the crocodile slowly begins to stand up. Zack takes her hands.
Zack
We all suggested it. In a way. I'm saying this, Ivan being in a crocodile, could be extremely bad for him, Anya. In more ways than the immediately medically obvious. And I want to make sure that we're united about how we handle it and don't get distracted by, uh… Anya?
He smiles at her. She's looking at Ivan/CROCODILE behind him.
Anya
Oh my God!
Ivan/CROCODILE is now standing. Zack turns and sees this.
Zack
Oh shit! Ivan, are you doing that?
Ivan/Crocodile
Big time. Ooh… that's better.
Anya
I mean… you're absolutely huge!
Ivan/Crocodile
Cheers, Anne. Finally forced my way into the legs.
Ivan starts to move the crocodile's legs.
Anya
Oh wow, Ivan, that's amazing.
A journalist, Dimitri (Popov in a beanie), enters.
Dimitri
Croc! Over here!
Ivan/CROCODILE spins round to face Dimitri.
Ivan/Crocodile
Yes, mate!
Dimitri
How you feeling in there?
Ivan/Crocodile
Better than ever, dude.
53
Dimitri
Got any more songs for us?
Ivan/Crocodile
Ha! No, no, not right now I'm afraid, lads, it's time to get a little bit serious, if I may. For, ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls; thank you for joining me here this afternoon, my name is The Croc Monsieur: artist, singer, prophet, miracle of nature, social outsider and reptilian insider. I am here not just to entertain you, but to help you. To save you. And I'd like, if I may, to tell you a little story. Once upon a time, in a city not unlike this one, full of people not unlike you, there was a zoo, not unlike this one, full of animals, not unlike me. The owner of this zoo looked after his animals: he fed them, washed them and kept them healthy, because if they were happy, his visitors were happy, and business boomed. And although the animals weren't free, they appreciated the owner's care and lived in peace with one another. One day, however, everything changed. Two European men in long, tweed coats, with bowler hats and large grey moustaches (one each, that is) waddled around the zoo discussing the political ideas of the day. They were entrepreneurs, siphoning money that ought to be paid in tax in their home country into developing nations like this one. As they passed the chimpanzee cage, one man turned to the other and said: 'Now that the king of this land has released the serfs from their bondage, turning slaves into citizens, is not animal captivity also shameful and immoral?' The chimpanzees, who spoke a smattering of human languages, quickly arranged a meeting with all the animals to discuss what they had heard. The bigger beasts with long lifespans, like the elephants and the hippos, thought it best to ignore what humans were doing and focus on themselves. The more excitable creatures, however, like the stoats and the snakes, whipped up the other animals into a self-righteous frenzy, and led a brash band of beasts to confront the zookeeper and demand that this wave of progress be extended to them. And, shamed by the animals' accusations of tyranny, the zookeeper agreed at once to treat them in a manner in keeping with modern, human morality. Instead of being freed, the animals would be paid. They would stop54being slaves and become workers. They'd pay for their food and for their cages to be cleaned, but in turn they would receive a wage from the zoo. The animals accepted at once, excited and emboldened by their new rights and freedoms, and, although many of them couldn't understand how their situation would be any different, or the overall concept of money, they felt that they had won a famous victory and were filled with optimism and excitement. At first, nothing changed. Some species nibbled or widdled on these small round pieces of metal being deposited into their cage. Some ignored the coins completely, oblivious to them being brought in or taken away, uninterested in the entire transaction, and life carried on as it always had. Then, one day, the chimps began to realise that they could choose when and how to spend their money. By eating less food and refusing to have their cage cleaned, they managed to stockpile their shiny coins and, within a week, had used the money they'd saved to buy a cactus. With which, they were understandably thrilled. Two months later, hungry and dirty, they used their savings to compile mirrors and lights and hats and kites, and added another floor to their cage, slowly turning it into by far the most eye-catching and elaborate part of the zoo. Although some of the smaller chimps died from hunger or diseases that bred in their growing pyramid of dung, soon their cage attracted by far the most visitors. The hyenas, living nearby, saw what the chimps had done and quickly followed suit – diverting the money they would have spent on food and cleaning into flashy fireworks to lure visitors over to their cage. Other animals, led by the elephants and the hippos, refused to have any part of this, unwilling to compete for attention, unmoved by the chimps' and the hyenas' sudden surge in popularity, calling it faddish and pointless, and harmful for the collective health of the zoo. And despite their new-found popularity, the chimps and hyenas were frustrated. And felt cheated. All of the animals in the zoo were still being paid the same amount, even though the chimps and the hyenas brought in way more traffic, having invested so heavily in their own cages. And they promptly informed the zookeeper that, from now on, the55gate receipts should be divided among the animals according to the number of visitors they receive, rather than by equal share. By now the hyenas and the chimps were the zoo's star attraction, and the owner couldn't afford to anger them and had no choice but to agree to their demands. And, as money flowed to the chimps and the hyenas, other animals began to suffer. Over the next few months, unable to attract visitors, the otters starved and the turtles got worms. The llamas, who'd invested their entire budget on berets, survived merely on the food that the elephants were willing to spare and fire over the fence with their trunks, if that's possible. All the while, the aspirational animals kept developing their cages, which by now had become entire enclosures, which it was almost impossible for visitors to avoid. The zoo itself continued to thrive, the gate receipts soaring as the animals developed and improved every section of the zoo by themselves, and yet more people rushed to see the results. Unable to see a way to be competitive, the genetically lazy two-toed sloths took out a mortgage on their cage from a passing bank manager and instantly became a big attraction, spending the windfall on expensive plastic surgery to make them look more like the chimps, and confuse the fans of the hugely popular primates into visiting them instead. Soon all of the animals had taken out mortgages on their cages and spent the money on increasingly outlandish and attention-grabbing items, and the zoo was filled with fountains and vases, chandeliers and murals. Exactly one year after their last visit, the two entrepreneurs with the grey moustaches (still one each) visited the zoo once more, confused and amazed by how it had changed. The previously well-proportioned site was now totally overrun by the sprawling enclosures of six or seven species who had bought up everything and had complete and constant access to the visitors. And in a small, squalid corner of the compound, the remaining hundreds of species lived huddled together in a ghetto, destitute and diseased, unseen by the zoo's many customers. As the men passed the ninth chimpanzee cage, piled high with gold bars, fine wines and portraits, one turned to the other and asked: 'What's happened to this56place?' The other man smirked and lit a cigar wedged in his thick lips: 'Well, it's obvious!' he replied, puffing out a woolly web of smoke, 'What's happened here… is progress.'
Snap blackout. There is a candle lit. The lights grow onto…
Dawn, growing into a sunny morning. Masha enters. As well as her belongings, she carries a loaf of bread and some cheese. There is a figure sleeping in the bed.
Masha
Semyon?
I knew you wouldn't do it
Just like you knew I wouldn't get on any train
I've always believed in you
I walked instead
I walked and walked
And at first light a feeling came on me
Like I was floating inches off the street
I joined a queue for bread
It brought me back to earth, the smell of food
I watched the daylight soak the city
And I thought about your face
And thinking of it made me warm.
We're hungry; that's all that's wrong with us.
Would you like some bread?
She gently lifts the sheet. Serafima is lying there in a stupor.
Mum! What're you doing in our bed?
Where's my husband?
Come on, move it
Masha roughly shakes her. Serafima moans. The remains of the party slowly become apparent to Masha.
What's been going on?
Mother, where's Semyon?
85
Serafima
I can't bear it
They're out on the wasteland looking for his body
The shock hits Masha.
They had to wait for dawn so they could see
Masha falls to her knees.
Where were you? Why did you go? I came running after you to try and bring you back but you were gone
Masha
Semyon
Semyon
No
Serafima
I'm sorry
It's like a bad old dream
I'm sorry, Masha
Serafima takes Masha in her arms. They hold each other. Enter Yelpidy, Aristarkh and Viktor.
Yelpidy
Weep, weep, young widow. Hold your little ones close and weep, weep for their daddy
Aristarkh
What daddy?
Yelpidy
The little ones' daddy
Aristarkh
What little ones?
Yelpidy
His little ones
Aristarkh
There are no little ones
Yelpidy
Well, that's fate then; he missed his chance. Weep, young widow, for the little ones he never had
Aristarkh
Thank you, Father, for those comforting words from the Church. My dear young widow, it is truel Your husband is dead
Viktor
And yet he lives. His image is shining with life. The departed Semyon Semyonovich lives on in our midst86 as a poetic symbol of our disenchanted times. And as this symbol, he will never die
Masha emits a terrible cry of grief.
Aristarkh
Goodness me
Serafima
Where did you find him?
Aristarkh
Under a tree
Serafima
Is he a mess?
Aristarkh
From compassion, I couldn't look
Serafima
Where's the body?
Aristarkh
Those endowed with strength of arm are bringing him. We are the advance party. Madam, we have little time to lose. The corpse must be prepared
Masha emits another terrible cry of grief.
Heavens above
Viktor
He died an honourable death. You should be proud
Aristarkh
His funeral will be inspired by that of Lenin himself. Obviously we don't have the same budget, but Semyon Semyonovich deserves nothing less
Masha
DEAD
HE IS DEAD
Serafima
Masha
Masha
Viktor
Honour and glory to the wife of our dearly departed
Aristarkh
Widow, stand with your head held high. He died a hero
Masha
MY LIFE IS OVER
87
Aristarkh
Come on now
You do understand what he was doing?
Masha
SENYECHKA
Yelpidy
Why do women always make this racket?
Time, I'd say, to beat a quick retreat
We'll come back when she's in the stupor that comes next
Then the mother might be in the mood for making tea
Viktor
Wait – he comes. Our fallen comrade
They stand back respectfully. Alexander, Yegor and the Beggar-Musicians enter, carrying Semyon's body. Margarita and Kleopatra follow behind. Semyon has a wound to the head. The sight of him horrifies Masha into silence.
Yelpidy starts to pray.
Yelpidy
Soul of Christ, sanctify him
Body of Christ, save him
Alexander and Yegor lay Semyon on the bed.
Blood of Christ, inebriate him
Water from the side of Christ, wash him
Passion of Christ, strengthen him
Alexander
Masha
I'm sorry
I ran after him too late
Masha
I'm sorry
Alexander goes up to his room and shuts the door.
Yelpidy
Oh good Jesus, hear us
Hide this man within thy wounds
Defend him from the wicked enemy
Kleopatra
People followed us / asking who he was. I –
88
Margarita
Shut it, can't you?
Yelpidy
Call him at the hour of his death
And bid him come to Thee
That he may give Thee praise for all eternity, Amen
All
Amen
Kleopatra
I told the bystanders what Semyon had done and why
They were deeply moved
And now a crowd is gathering outside
Yegor
Maria Lukianovna
He was curled up on the wasteland
Eyes closed in peace
I've brought you back his gun
Masha
I'll kill myself
Margarita
No you won't
Yegor
I didn't know Semyon Semyonovich that well – not until the day he died. In fact, I thought him lazy – and a yob
Aristarkh
This man is one of life's natural fools
Yegor
As you know, I am a model worker; recipient of a People's Award for speed and diligence. But Semyon Semyonovich put into words thoughts so secret I would never have dared think them. If those in the Kremlin could have heard, they would indeed have shat themselves –
Serafima
Yegor Timoveivich, now is not the time
Yegor
There are hundreds of men like him, with secret thoughts locked in their breasts
Masha
Go away
Yegor
He called himself a boy genius. That's true of all of us
89
Aristarkh
Another time, comrade
Yegor
This humble postman asks if there is anything that he might do
Masha
No
Yegor
I would lay myself down flat
In your dear service.
If you would let me kiss your hand
Masha
Fuck off
Yegor
Thank you
Masha
All of you, fuck off
Get out of here
I hate you
Yegor makes his way upstairs.
Yelpidy
I think it's time we took our leave
Masha
I want to die
I want to die
Upstairs, Yegor quietly exits.
Kleopatra
(to Viktor) That girl is devastated, is she not?
Viktor
She is indeed
Kleopatra
Semyon Semyonovich inspired love. Even his domestics loved him
Serafima
Father, how will we bury him?
We've not a kopeck to our names
Aristarkh
Good woman. Do not fear. We have taken it upon ourselves to pay for everything
Yelpidy
With the generosity of the Church
Aristarkh
And the last of my mother's bone china, we're providing top quality undertakers, wreaths
90
Yelpidy
Sung mass with a full choir
Viktor
The poem I'm composing, for which I'll take no fee
Aristarkh
A camera, a new suit of clothes for him to wear
Kleopatra
And something for you women, too. I'm sure he'd want you in his retinue – however poor and humble you may be
Masha
Get out
Yelpidy
I'll go and book the choir
Yelpidy exits.
Kleopatra
You shall have a hand-made hat, perhaps the latest thing in felt, something elegant to lift your features
Serafima
That's lovely; what a lovely girl you are
Kleopatra exits.
Aristarkh
I took the liberty of ordering his coffin yesterday. It's made of oak, with fittings in a modernist style; quite the finest
Serafima
Thank you, sir. It's wonderful that Semyon's getting all that, but can I put in a request for the living?
Viktor
The living?
Serafima
We haven't got any food
Aristarkh
Food
Viktor
We must start a fund
Serafima
A fund
Aristarkh
Of course; a fund
Viktor
I'll see to it myself
Aristarkh
We shall return before you know it
91
Viktor and Aristarkh exit.
Serafima
What lovely, educated men; so clean
Margarita
A fund? You don't miss a trick, you
Serafima
You look after her while I wash the carcass. He's going to be on show. We don't want him dirtying his coffin. I'll work like a machine on him
Margarita
(to Masha) You poor love
Serafima
(examining the body) Now, I saw a lot of head wounds in the war
At this close range the brains would usually slide out
With little bits of skull lodged in the mess.
That's very neat
Just a little hole above the ear
Serafima climbs up to the bathroom. We hear her filling a bucket of water.
Masha
Put me with Semyon
I want to hold him
Margarita
I never thought he'd do it
I can't believe he did
Masha
I want to die with him
Margarita
No you don't
Masha
I want to die
Margarita
Masha
I'm so sorry
Margarita puts Masha next to Semyon. Serafima is coming down the stairs with a bucket and cloth.
Serafima
Everything taken care of
A fund for our expenses
A decadent hat
92
Margarita
You're like your mother. You'd survive an Arctic storm
Serafima
On every cloud a silver lining
We'll be all right, my girl
His death will give us life
I wish we had a clean dishcloth; never mind
(To Margarita.) Roll your silky sleeves up then
Margarita
I'm no good with corpses
My vocation's always been with men who are alive
She climbs the stairs.
Alexander needs me
Serafima
You know, for all your fancy business talk, you're still a fool
Margarita
I know. But I've never seen him look like that
Serafima
Like what?
Margarita
Seems Kalabushkin's got a heart
Beating somewhere, after all
Margarita knocks on Alexander's door. Alexander takes her into his room. He shuts the door on their emotional embrace. Masha is clinging to Semyon.
Masha
He always kept me warm and now he's cold
Masha kisses Semyon. She is bewildered. She looks round at Serafima.
But not that cold
She sits up. She pokes him. Semyon suddenly snores loudly.
Bastard
She makes her hands into a single fist and hits him in the heart. Semyon starts.
93
Semyon
Dead
I'm dead
Hosanna
The pain
I'm flying
Masha
Semyon Semyonovich
Semyon
Angel, I hear you
Take me to God
The light hurts me
Hosanna
Masha slaps him round the face.
Masha
Wake up
Semyon
Pain
I'm dead
Am I in hell?
Serafima
You're here
Semyon
Dear Father, I have suffered down on Earth; don't make me suffer more
Serafima
Semyon, I'm not your father; I'm your mother-in-law
Semyon
Serafima
Where are we?
Are you dead too?
Am I with you for ever?
This is awful
This is hell
Masha hits and punches him as she speaks.
Masha
Wake up, you idiot
You're not dead; you're drunk
You're stinking of it
You bastard
94
How dare you
I thought you'd gone
Semyon
Masha
Am I alive?
Masha
Yes
Semyon
I'm alive
She hits him again.
Mashenka, I'm alive
Masha starts to cry. Semyon holds her. Serafima wearily picks up the bucket.
Serafima
Well, we'll not be needing this. You can wash yourself
She starts back up the stairs.
Semyon
I'm alive
We hear the sound of Margarita and Alexander making love.
Serafima
They've no respect for the dead
She locks herself in the toilet.
Semyon
I left here with my gun. I saw a beggar on a trolley by the wasteland. He had no fingers and no legs. He couldn't see me; both his eyes were white. I gave him all my money. He gripped it pincer-like, thumb against his ruined hand. I said: 'Take it, brother. Ten roubles for you there.' 'Don't insult me with your litter, curse you,' he replied and he let it fly away. I saw it sail up through the street light and the ground started shifting like thin ice. I ran. I stumbled over clumps of grass and wire and frozen shit. I didn't stop until I hit a tree. I knew the place; the tree that blossoms during May and for a fortnight every year looks like a piece of heaven; but last95 night it was freezing barren black. I held the trunk with one hand and I put the gun end in my mouth. Turns out it was the bottle so I drank until the stars all burst and everything went dark. Then my fingers closed round metal and I brought it up to see, and bang –
Margarita and Alexander finish.
Masha
You missed
Semyon
Reckon I did
Masha
You stupid twat
Semyon
Can't even kill myself
Masha
Useless, you
Semyon
(putting his hand up to his wound) Look at that. I got a wound, though
Masha
You were miles out
Semyon
Nice to know you're glad to see me, anyway
Masha
Well. Better luck next time, eh?
Semyon
Mashenka
Masha
Am I really so horrible to live with?
Semyon
No
I am
Masha
Senya
Senyechka
Serafima emerges from the toilet.
Serafima
Jesus of Nazareth, save us or we perish!
What'll we tell those people?
They've gone to plan your funeral
Masha
So they have
Serafima
They're modelling it on Lenin's
96
Semyon
Shit on fire
Serafima
We'll take care of all the bills, they said
Semyon
Your husband died a symbol
Serafima
They're even making me a hat
Semyon
I'm supposed to be dead
Two undertakers, Stepan Vasilievich and Oleg Leonidovich, enter. They are carrying a coffin and some wreaths.
Oleg
Is this where the dead man lives?
Semyon
What?
Oleg
The dead man. Does he live here?
Stepan
To you, Oleg, to you
Oleg
Mind that thing; hang on
Semyon
Who are you?
Stepan
We've come from 'Eternity'
Masha
Pardon?
Stepan
From 'Eternity'
Oleg
You know, the funeral parlour
Stepan
Right, where do you want it?
Oleg
Come on please, comrades; it's heavy. We've carried it all the way from the workshop
Pause. Semyon, Masha and Serafima are staring at them in horror.
Stepan
Look, I know it's a bit of a shock when you first see it, but please take comfort from the fact that it's the very best one we do
97
Oleg
Fantastic coffin, this. I'd have one myself if I could afford it – and if I was dead, obviously
Stepan
Oh Jesus, let's just put it down
Stepan and Oleg put the coffin on the table.
Right, where's the incoming occupant?
Semyon
What?
Stepan
The incoming occupant. You see they make us say that, as if obscure language makes losing your loved one easier or something. But that's 'Eternity for you: full of obscurity. I say, why don't we just say 'the body'?
Oleg
The corpse. Where's the corpse?
Stepan
What's its name?
Oleg
(consulting a clipboard) Semyon Semyonovich Podsekalnikov
Semyon
Here
Oleg
Where?
Serafima
He's not ready yet. We haven't finished him
Stepan
We're supposed to lift him in for you
Semyon
No thanks
Stepan
It's part of the service. We're meant to do it
Oleg
Once the mortis sets in, it's a tricky job
Serafima
We'll manage
Oleg
It's upsetting, love. They don't bend
Masha
We'll look after him ourselves, thank you
Serafima
We like a challenge
Stepan
You sure?
98
Masha
Yes, thanks
Oleg
Right, then
He bands Semyon a clipboard.
Sign for it, will you?
Semyon takes up the pen. He falters.
Semyon
Feels weird. You do it
He hands the clipboard to Masha. She signs.
Oleg
And there for the wreaths, please
She signs again.
Stepan
There's a lot of folk out there; quite a crowd. Was he well known?
Semyon
Not really
Stepan
Must have been a Party member, or something. What was he, a People's Commissar?
Semyon
He was just a
Nothing, really
Oleg
Well, top-class coffin, that. I hope he gets good use of it
Serafima
Thanks, lads. Cheerio then
Stepan
I feel great compassion for the bereaved
Oleg
So do I
Stepan
I always pity the dead person too
Semyon
Thank you
Pause.
Oleg
Glad you like the coffin, then
Stepan
Have you got any change?
99
Masha comes forward rummaging in her pockets. She finds a tiny coin.
Masha
Good luck
Stepan and Oleg leave, insulted. Masha picks up one of the wreaths. She reads the dedication.
'For my beloved Semyon. A fighter, a hero and an unforgettable son-in-law.' (She looks at Serafima.) It's from you
Serafima
Did I write that?
Masha
No, they did
Serafima
We haven't got a body
Masha
What are we going to do?
We hear the front door opening.
Serafima
It's them
Semyon
I've let them down. They trusted me. They were banking on me
We hear Aristarkh off, speaking through a loudhailer.
Aristarkh
(off) Comrades, this humble dwelling holds all that remains of Semyon Semyonovich Podsekalnikov
Semyon
They're the only people who've ever had time for anything I've said
Aristarkh
(off) In a few moments we shall escort him to his final resting place
Semyon
I thought I was a maggot. They made me feel a man
Yelpidy
(off) St Josef's on Zverkov Street, where you are welcome to reacquaint yourselves with God
Semyon
Look at that thing. It's fit for a prince
100
Aristarkh
(off) Await us here, comrades. We shall soon emerge with your fallen brother
Masha
We'll tell them the truth. How hard can that be? We'll tell them you're alive
Serafima
They were going to start a fund for us, a fund, Semyon
Semyon
My death would have provided for you?
Serafima
We were going to have an income
Semyon
Where's my gun? I'll kill myself
Masha
I've got a better idea – I'll kill you
Serafima
You won't have to; they'll kill him
Holy Virgin, pray for us
Aristarkh, Yelpidy and Viktor come up the stairs.
Masha and Serafima turn to face them. Behind them, Semyon panics.
He jumps into the coffin and lies there, as if dead.
Aristarkh
My dear young widow, the crowd is growing, swelling, multiplying beyond our wildest expectations
Masha
There's been a terrible mistake
Yelpidy
I have preached the parable of / Podsekalnikov
Aristarkh
We have all addressed the crowd, some more / reasonably than others
Viktor
I've managed to compose his praises in this verse
Masha
It's a mistake
Aristarkh
I've also contacted the press. / His fame will spread
Viktor
Revered widow, here is our collective effort to replace your husband. It's just the beginning
He hands her a collection of money.
101
Masha
We can't take this
Serafima
Holy Jesus, I can't bear it
Masha
Thank you but
He isn't dead
It's a mistake
He's still alive
Pause.
Aristarkh
Well, I'm rather confused that you should say that, my dear
Masha
We thought he was dead
And so did he, actually
But as you can see –
Masha turns. She sees Semyon, corpse-like in the coffin.
Serafima
Has he died?
Masha
Semyon
What are you doing?
Get up out of there
Aristarkh
Oh no, she's hysterical
Yelpidy
(going to Semyon) Look at him. Dead
Masha
Semyon
GET UP I SAID
He's alive
Aristarkh
My dear widow –
Masha
I'm not a widow; he's alive
Viktor
She's trapped in her moment of nemesis Unable to face her tragic hubris
Aristarkh
Stop it
Masha
Mother, tell them
102
Serafima
(taking the money from Masha) Masha, when you see it from their point of view –
Yelpidy
I've seen this happen before. She'll either come round in an hour or two or she's a case for the asylum
Viktor
Tragedy
Alexander and Margarita appear on the landing.
Masha
Semyon, I'm warning you. Get up or I'll murder you
She goes to shake him. Yelpidy and Aristarkh stop her.
Yelpidy
(stopping her) Widow, do not defile the dead
Aristarkh
We can't let you do it
Masha
Semyon
Viktor
You must face the truth
Masha
Get up, you idiot
You're making it harder for yourself
Yelpidy
Your husband is dead
Masha
Semyon
Alexander
What's going on?
Masha
Alexander Kalabushkin, Semyon is alive
Margarita
Oh no; poor girl
Alexander
Mashenka
Margarita
I once had a neighbour who kept his dead mother sitting at the table for sixteen days because he couldn't believe she'd gone. It was the smell that convinced him in the end
Masha
He was talking to me five minutes ago
Serafima
(hiding the money in her apron) You know, Masha, you never can tell with these head wounds.103 I remember the bone surgeon telling me that a fellow can be up and walking around one minute with blood gushing out of his ear, telling you a fine old joke and next minute – gone
Masha
What are you saying?
Serafima
I'm saying brain explosion. Look at him
Masha
Alexander Kalabushkin, he's not dead
Yelpidy
She needs rest
Seclusion in a dark place
Possibly restraints
Alexander
Masha, I carried him home. He was frozen to the touch
Masha
Well, he thawed
Aristarkh
Is there a dark room where she can get some rest?
Margarita
Bring her up here
Alexander
Come on, Masha
Masha
You wouldn't. Alexander Kalabushkin, you couldn't –
Alexander
I'm sorry, Mashenka
I'm so sorry
But you'll thank me for it, love
Alexander puts Masha over his shoulder. He carries her up the stairs.
Masha
Semyon Semyonovich Podsekalnikov, I will get you for this. You toe-rag. You coward. Why is life so difficult to face?
Margarita
Come on, girl
Masha
Let me go
Put me down
104
Alexander
I'm sorry
Margarita
Leave her with me
Masha
All right, all right, he's dead
I believe you
Just don't bury him
Don't bury him
Semyon sits up in a panic. No one is looking at the coffin; all their eyes are on Masha. She is the only person who notices Semyon.
Semyon, you FOOL
Margarita closes the door. Semyon hurriedly lies down.
Viktor
Her grief is epic
Cassandra tormented
Andromache at the gates of Troy
Aristarkh
She nearly bit me. (Setting up the camera.) Now, without wishing to ride roughshod over the needs of the bereaved, I'd like to point out that the crowd should not be kept waiting. They have come to see a suicide and suicide they'll have. (to Viktor.) Have you sent his final words to the printer?
Viktor
Of course
Aristarkh
With the changes I suggested?
Viktor
Yes
Yelpidy
One has to admit that this dead man is not the finest choice
Alexander
What do you mean?
Yelpidy
Well, it's a pity that a People's Commissar or a society figure hadn't decided to shoot himself in the head
Aristarkh
I disagree – his obscurity is his perfection
Yelpidy
How?
105
Aristarkh
Because we can mould him. In our careful hands, he will become the model dead man
Viktor
You're right. We can construct a truth. Listen to my poem; I've chosen a folksy, populist style so it will appeal to the masses. We need them to recognise themselves
Aristarkh
(to Serafima) Madam, could we have you by the coffin?
Serafima
Here?
Aristarkh
And you, Alexander Kalabushkin; you've got a good face. Stand there
Alexander
No thanks
Alexander moves away. We hear a plaintive melody, coming closer.
Viktor
A young working man, without job or means
Found his life was a series of frustrated dreams.
But the path he was given he chose not to tread.
For society's sake, he chose death instead.
Aristarkh
(to Serafima) Madam, forgive me, but I don't think a smile is appropriate
The photograph is taken.
Viktor
When we climb up snowdrifts or lie in the grass,
Betraying his pain with our carefree hearts
Let us think of that second of slippery time.
When death drew him forwards at midnight's slow chime,
His body now crumpled, the gun in his hand,
They killed him – the philistines – no more could he stand!
106
Aristarkh
Doesn't scan
Viktor
It's for the peasants, you pedant
Kleopatra enters followed by the Beggar-Musicians, who are playing the plaintive melody. She speaks over the last verse of Viktor's poem.
His coffin will / lead us through life from this day
Kleopatra
The crowd is enormous. We had to fight / our way through
Viktor
The ultimate price he paid, I would say,
/ Our hopes are now with him buried below.
Kleopatra
I told them, 'I am a murderer!'
Viktor
Kiki, I'm reciting!
Kleopatra
Semyon Semyonovich wanted me body and soul and when I said, 'No, my darling!' he ended his life. I murdered him
Viktor
Murdered him? You?
Kleopatra
Yes, you drummer
Viktor
Your body is made entirely of lies
Kleopatra
My body is HIS! They've been so moved by our tragedy
Masha comes out onto the landing. Margarita follows her.
Viktor
By your what?
Kleopatra
By the tragedy of our great love
Viktor
That's quick work, even for you. You only knew him a day
Kleopatra
It was long enough. He took his life because of me. If only you were man enough to do the same
107
Viktor
Oh, if only
Kleopatra
Ah, you have a camera –
Let me throw myself upon him
Masha
(running down the stairs) Over my dead body
Yelpidy
Why do these women insist on hurling themselves at corpses?
Masha and Kleopatra meet over the coffin.
Masha
He's mine, you stupid, stuck-up tart
Kleopatra
How dare you, you cleaner
Masha
I'm his wife
Kleopatra
You're quite mistaken
Masha
No, I'm not
Margarita
She's his wife
Kleopatra
Well, what does it matter? He wanted me, me
Masha
Semyon, sort this out
Kleopatra
He died for my love
Masha
He will in a minute
The men restrain Masha and Kleopatra.
Aristarkh
Ladies, please, this is not a personal drama. Semyon Semyonovich died so that others could act for him. / His death is a clarion call to Russia's intellectuals
Viktor
He had a poet's sensibility. He died because the state had no faith / in him
Yelpidy
He died because he had no faith. / Perilous is the godless path he trod
Margarita
He died because he'd had a row with Masha / and he thought she'd left him
108
Alexander
He died because he didn't have a fucking job / and it sent him twisted
Masha
HE ISN'T DEAD
Pause.
Serafima
Is that my hat?
Kleopatra
Yes
Serafima
(taking it) Thank you so much
Aristarkh
Gentlemen – and people – there is no reason why Semyon Semyonovich could not be poet and lover, political thinker, unemployed worker, religious devotee – and immortal to those who loved him. Our model dead man could be all of these things
Viktor
You're right
Yelpidy
I'll put the lid on, shall I?
Alexander
I'll put the lid on –
When his wife is ready
Masha?
Masha
You take him. Put him on show and then shove him in the ground. God help you, Semyon
Alexander picks up the lid. He raises it over the coffin.
Alexander
I was no friend to you
Forgive me
Semyon embraces Alexander.
Semyon
No, no, you forgive me
Aristarkh screams. There is pandemonium.
Forgive me, comrades. All of you, forgive me
Yelpidy
Get thee from me
Kleopatra
The living dead
109
Aristarkh
Get back! Get back!
Serafima
It's a miracle! A resurrection, look!
Semyon
I can't go on. Sorry, but I've got to live
Viktor
Alive?
Semyon
Yes
Masha
I tried to tell you
Aristarkh
You were supposed to kill yourself
Semyon
I tried to
Serafima
He only missed by an inch
Margarita
We wept for you
Alexander
Actually, I just got dust in my eyes
Masha
Semyon
Semyon
I'm sorry
Kleopatra
I have wasted my suffering
Viktor
You Judas
Aristarkh
You have put your own interests before society
Semyon
Society? What's that? As far as I can tell from you it's a factory of slogans. My society is here, with her, and her, and them
Aristarkh
I thought you were a hero and I find you are a worm. How can you go on living?
Semyon
I don't know; thoughtlessly
Like a chicken with its head cut off perhaps.
I don't want to die. Not for you, not for them, not for clever men or the masses, not for romance, not for art, and not for God
Yelpidy
Blasphemer
110
Viktor
We were going to make you a symbol
Semyon
You could have made me a bearded lady
What would I care in that box?
I am alive and well
And nothing on this Earth has ever scared me
Like the thought of lying there for ever
With the lid nailed down
Yelpidy
He has made fools of us all
Masha
I tried to tell you
Viktor
Are you laughing at our expense?
Aristarkh
Our literal expense. My mother's china
Kleopatra
Semyon, you lied
Semyon
I didn't lie. I meant to do it
But I can't be your model dead man
I can't set the world ablaze
I'm not a multiplying worm
All I want is a quiet life and a decent wage
Viktor
That's bourgeois
Aristarkh
Listen to him
Viktor
Everything he says is counter-revolutionary
Aristarkh
You're right
Viktor
Why didn't we realise before? He's a traitor to the revolution
Semyon
What have I ever done against the revolution?
Aristarkh
You spoke
Semyon
You all wanted me to speak
Aristarkh
But only as a dead man. I told you from the start that there are things the living cannot say – and you have said them, boy
111
Semyon
Then let me whisper
Let me sometimes whisper, 'It's a hard life,' 'It's a hard life.'
Because we need to, people like me with not enough bread.
Leave me free to whisper
You're so busy constructing truth I doubt you'll even hear
The noise of the crowd is growing louder; funereal hymns are being sung.
Kleopatra
Listen
Viktor
The crowd
Yelpidy
We have promised them a suicide
Aristarkh
And we cannot deliver
Semyon
It's a hard life
Kleopatra
Viktor, what'll we do?
Viktor
Kiki
Semyon
It's a hard life
Yelpidy
The merciless masses
Viktor
They'll tear us apart
Kleopatra
Save me from the crowd
Kleopatra throws herself upon Viktor.
Viktor
My perfect muse
Aristarkh
You have exposed us to the rage and ridicule of all those people
You cheat, you thief, you utter nonentity
You have dug us a grave with your own hands
And you dare to survive?
Yelpidy
We must have a body
112
Kleopatra
Shoot him
Masha
Shoot her
Aristarkh
Recant and shoot yourself
Yelpidy
I could get him with this shovel if you held him down
Semyon
No need; I've still a bullet left
Take the gun, comrades
If I've committed any crime
If I've brought death or misfortune to a single soul
Then take your shot
Aristarkh
Huh
Semyon
Come forward, Aristarkh Dominikovich Grand-Skubik. If you can name my crime, then take the gun and shoot me
Serafima is hiding the money. Aristarkh takes the gun. He aims it at Semyon.
Aristarkh
You wasted our money
Semyon
I'll pay your money back, every kopek
Masha
I'll work for you. I'll slave for you
Serafima
I could work down the mines; in the sewers. I'll take on anything
Masha
We'll go begging, all of us
Aristarkh
You wasted our time
Margarita is at the top of the stairs. She lifts Serafima's bucket and holds it over the heads of Aristarkh, Viktor, Yelpidy and Kleopatra.
Margarita
Anyone thinking of firing that gun should know that I have a bucket of slops up here, from the toilet of this slum. He who moves, gets it
113
Aristarkh lowers the gun.
Aristarkh
I wasn't going to fire. How could you think that? I'm a civilised man. I just wanted to teach him a lesson
Margarita
Take it off him, Masha
Masha takes the gun and aims it at them.
Kleopatra
(trying to hide herself in his jacket) Viktor, shelter me
Masha
Get back
Yelpidy
I'm a / humble man of God
Viktor
We're peace-loving artists, men of the people We believe in / humane socialism
Aristarkh
We always put the / proletariat first
Kleopatra
Spare me
Masha
Shut it, tart
Margarita
Semyon, get out of that coffin. Kalabushkin, put the lid on it
Semyon and Alexander obey her commands.
Viktor
Kiki, you smell like a meadow
Kleopatra
I belong in your jacket
Margarita
Right, there's your body
There's your hollow truth
Take it and go
Aristarkh
But it's empty
Alexander
Who's to know?
Margarita
Tell them he shot his head off and you can't show the corpse. Now pick it up
114
Alexander
You heard the lady
Viktor
Come on, Kiki. We'll get through this
Kleopatra
I can't
I'm too sensitive
Serafima
Chuck the slops on her
Kleopatra moves with a squeal and takes her place as pallbearer.
Margarita
And if any of you ever bother this man or his family again, I'll tell the world that coffin's empty and I'll ban you from my bar
Kleopatra
/ No
Yelpidy
Margarita, / you couldn't. I'm just a lamb
Aristarkh
Dear lady, it's my / window on the world
Viktor
No, please. We're all friends here. All civilised friends
Alexander
Play them out, lads
The Beggar-Musicians play an inappropriate tune.
Semyon
(waving them off) Good luck with the funeral Hope they like your poem
The four pallbearers leave with their coffin.
The remaining five celebrate.
Masha
Thank you
Alexander
You've really got style, Margarita.
A bucket of shite?
Margarita
It's only water
Alexander
Beautiful Beautiful
115
Serafima
Look at them go
The crowd parting like the Red Sea
Their heads bowed in respect.
Amazing what people will believe
Margarita
I'll open a bottle, shall I?
Alexander
Music to my ears
She goes into Alexander's room.
Masha
Alexander, go and fetch Yegor –
Tell him what's happened.
Let him come and share
Alexander goes up the stairs.
I told him to fuck off when I thought you were dead
I was horrible to him
Semyon
I am in love
I'm in love with my hands, with my feet, with my legs
With this bed
With my wife
With the hawthorn tree
And the blue sky
With that crowd
With the music
And more than anything, I have fallen in love with my stomach
My poor stomach
It was all I could think of in that coffin
Masha
Senyechka, I got bread
Semyon
I haven't eaten for a whole day
And a night and another endless day
Not since that black pudding
Mashenka
You best of all wives
I am wildly in love with that bread
116
Masha
Let me furnish you, Semyon
Serafima
You can eat the lot. Here, we can afford plenty more. Five thousand loaves
She puts the collection of money on the table. Margarita uncorks a bottle.
Margarita
You can afford some glasses, too
Masha
Mother, we have to give that back
Serafima
How can we? It's Semyon's. He earned it by dying
Alexander comes out of the attic. He is ashen.
Margarita
What is it?
A hush falls.
Alexander, what's happened?
Alexander
Yegor Timoveivich
Yegor has hanged himself
Serafima
Holy God, why?
Silence.
Alexander
He left us a note
Semyon
What does it say?
Ivan/CROCODILE, now wearing a large top hat and a tweed cravat, paces in his pit. Popov stands nearby.
Ivan/Crocodile
Who are these people?
Mr Popov
Civil-rights nutters, animal-rights nutters, general nutters, students, a lot of students who liked you, ironically, now hate you.
Ivan/Crocodile
Hate me ironically?
Mr Popov
No I think actually –
Ivan/Crocodile
So get security down there –
Mr Popov
We don't have security –
Ivan/Crocodile
I mean… for the Lord's sake, Popov!
Mr Popov
We've never needed it before.
Ivan/Crocodile
You've never housed someone with my level of profile before. There should be at least six heavily armed heavies around me at all times.
66
Mr Popov
You should never have stopped doing the songs if you ask me –
Ivan/Crocodile
People do not need songs, Popov! They need truth and… theatre –
Mr Popov
They were miles better than all this pro-serfdom stuff –
Ivan/Crocodile
What? Who's saying that?
Mr Popov
The mob, I think, the press –
Ivan/Crocodile
I'm not pro-serfdom!
Mr Popov
A lot of old folk are with you on that, as it goes –
Ivan/Crocodile
They're not with me. I'm not with that. Clearly. I'm an actor! I'm all about freedom and stuff. Where are those hacks from earlier?
Mr Popov
There are a couple by the zebras –
Ivan/Crocodile
Right! I'm going and clear this up –
Mr Popov
You won't get through to them though –
Ivan/Crocodile
I will. I'll keep it simple this time. I won't do an animal story –
Mr Popov
Through the mob, I mean. They'll tear you a new one. And a big one. They're so bloody offended.
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, can they stop being offended?
Mr Popov
I think… they don't want to –
Ivan/Crocodile
Go and tell them to stop being offended. Popov! Quickly!
Mr Popov
Yes, alright, I'll try…
He runs to the exit and puts on a baseball cap.
Protester
Traitor! Royal-bashing bastard!
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh, shit! Popov! Help!
Protester
Calling the serfs animals!
67
Ivan/Crocodile
No, I didn't, I… Popov!
The Protester switches hats to becomes Popov again.
Mr Popov
I'm back, Ivan! Getting rid of him now!
He shoos the Protester out and then changes hats again to become a nobleman, Baron Boris Bogolepov, in a top hat.
Boris
Well done, laddie!
Ivan/Crocodile
What? Thank you. Who are you?
Boris
Baron Boris Bogelopov! Huge fan of your work! About time someone exposed this barmy emancipation bunk as a loony left-wing plot to bring down the country…
Ivan/Crocodile
Yes, thanks, that wasn't quite what I was saying but…
He swaps hats to become Mr Frampton and storms in.
Mr Frampton
You bloody idiot!
Ivan/Crocodile
What? Who's that?
Mr Frampton
Andrew Frampton! What did you have to go and do that for? Having a pop at business, losing our sponsorship –
Ivan/Crocodile
I didn't pop at business, Frampton, it was about a zoo –
Mr Frampton
Petersham Tweed Jackets just pulled out. After your antics. Demanding that we give them the banner back.
Ivan/Crocodile
What about the jackets?
Mr Frampton
And the jackets, yes.
Ivan/Crocodile
But… I deliberately plugged tweed coats in the story…
Mr Frampton
Doesn't matter. You're bad news. The Gazette says you hate Russia –
68
Ivan/Crocodile
But that's, I love Russia, I just hate the Tsar!
Mr Frampton
That's the same thing, you moron.
Ivan/Crocodile
Am I in The Gazette?
Zack appears at the tinsel. He has a newspaper. Frampton takes down the Petersham Tweed Jackets banner.
Zack
Ivan!
Ivan/Crocodile
Security! Frampton!
Zack
It's okay, it's me… it's Zack –
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh, thank Christ you're here! I really need another coffee.
Zack
I don't think I can go through that crowd again –
Ivan/Crocodile
That big is it?
Zack
Well, that livid, yes. Anya's out there now trying to stop some animal-rights people from burning this place down, Ivan –
Mr Frampton
Oh, bloody hell! I would absolutely hate it if they did that…!
Frampton runs out with the banner.
Ivan/Crocodile
Please, buddy, be a love and fetch me a coffee and copy of The Gazette – I need to know what these vultures are saying about me. And a coffee.
Zack
Yeah, I've got it here. Have you not seen it?
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, no, I've been in this room the whole time. And in this crocodile. What's it like?
He reads to Ivan from the paper.
Zack
'Big-mouth hypocrite croc-botherer, identified as jobbing actor Ivan Matveitch – ' it's not perfect…
Ivan/Crocodile
'Jobbing'?! What?
69
Zack
That can't be the main thing you're unhappy about there –
Ivan/Crocodile
Every actor's jobbing! That just means getting jobs…!
Zack
'Saw his sudden fame turn to infamy this afternoon, when he swapped his mildly diverting song-and-dance routines for a graphic and retrograde allegory attacking the Tsar's recent decision to free the serfs and comparing them to animals – '
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, that's bang out of context!
Zack
'The so-called Croc Monsieur also singled out foreign tax evaders – '
Ivan/Crocodile
Ah, right, they must be with me on that, surely –?
Zack
'Despite receiving over three thousand roubles cash in ticket sales since his crocodile residency began, so far completely unaccounted for – '
Ivan/Crocodile
What? It shouldn't be about me! Why are they focusing on me?
Zack
'Middle-class son of a senior civil servant, and accustomed to a life of easy privilege in St Petersburg – '
Ivan/Crocodile
I ate cheese and turnip last night!
Zack
'Is, according to an ex-girlfriend, also cold-blooded in the sack –'
Ivan/Crocodile
I beg your sweet pardon? Which bitch said that?
Zack
Uh… it just says… 'a dancer' –
Ivan/Crocodile
Lies! A dancer? They're just making it up now! How can they do this to me? Have these parasites no shame? Have they no responsibility to their readers, to the truth?
Zack
(finds a name) Her name's 'Katya'.
70
Ivan/Crocodile
Okay, yup, no, I know who that is. Shit!
Zack
'After his initially headline-hogging antics, it seems like Mr Matveitch's popularity is a thing of the past –'
Ivan/Crocodile
What? Does it really say that?
Zack
'And maybe it's time to say "see ya later alligator".'
Zack closes the paper. Beat. Some shouting from outside.
Ivan/Crocodile
Okay, Zack, go and get Popov! We're bringing them in… I may need a bit of protection here, bud, in case it gets tasty. The croc skin should be able to soak up a bit of aggro –
Zack
No, Ivan, please –
Ivan/Crocodile
But I'll need you as a human shield –
Zack
Just come out. Ivan.
Ivan/Crocodile
What? What do you mean?
Zack
Just come out of there. Come out and it'll all be over.
Beat.
Ivan/Crocodile
I can't –
Zack
You can. You've hollowed the thing out now. It's barely alive, you can easily climb out.
Ivan/Crocodile
Climb?
Zack
Slither, whatever.
Zack manhandles the crocodile, opening the mouth.
Ivan/Crocodile
What are you doing? Get off!
Zack
There's no resistance, look. It's basically dead.
Ivan spins away from him.
No one knows what you look like, Ivan. You can come out and just walk home. It's easy.
Beat.
71
Please. For all of us. This whole thing has been a bloody nightmare.
Ivan/Crocodile
I can see that the zoo story might have sounded a bit anti-freedom or whatever, but that's only because these wankers completely missed the point –
Zack
Yeah, that's what happens –
Ivan/Crocodile
I'll keep it simple next time, do something even thickos can follow –
Zack
No, Ivan, please –
Ivan/Crocodile
I'm not stopping, man! I'm making a lot of very good of money here –!
Zack
So? You can't spend it, can you? You're in a crocodile.
Ivan/Crocodile
I know that! I know I'm in a crocodile, mate! I'm more aware of that than anyone. And being in this crocodile is the only way I'm going to cobble together some kind of nest egg. And, to be clear, I'm still talking about money, I'm not literally interested in laying eggs.
Zack
It's bad for you though, Ivan.
Ivan/Crocodile
Hardly! Petersham's have given me four more hacking jackets –
Zack
It's awful for all of us.
Ivan/Crocodile
And you got a free hanky.
Zack
No, I know –
Ivan/Crocodile
Everyone's a winner –
Zack
Anya said no. Okay? I asked her to marry me and she said no.
Ivan/Crocodile
That's not because of this –
Zack
Of course it is. Please just come out, Ivan! Before people get burnt!
Ivan/CROCODILE takes Zack by the shoulders.
72
Ivan/Crocodile
Don't panic, Zack. I know what to do now. I didn't get it before. I was naive in the extremis.
Zack
It doesn't matter –
Ivan/Crocodile
I shouldn't be crowbarring in the politics, it's not my forte. I need to think about my audience, about what they want –
Zack
They don't want anything –
Ivan/Crocodile
What drew them here in the first place. What drew me into this crocodile.
Zack
Nothing drew you, it was an accident.
Ivan/Crocodile
No. It wasn't. Nu-uh. Everything happens for a reason, Zack. Everything. I believe that.
Zack
Yeah, and I'm sure most people who've randomly become famous for not really doing anything do too. But there's no meaning or fate here, Ivan. You're just… in a crocodile and not dead.
Ivan/Crocodile
That's right. I'm not dead. I'm still here. And while there's breath in my gob and blood in my bod, I'm going to plough on. Give the people a show… whether they like it or not –
Zack
It'll definitely be the latter –
Ivan/Crocodile
In time, I know I'll win them back –
Zack
You won't –
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh, give them some credit, Zack…
Zack
You're no good, Ivan.
Beat.
Ivan/Crocodile
Come again?
Zack
No matter what you do, the public won't like it. You're bad. Give up.
Ivan/Crocodile
Is this a reverse-psychology thing?
73
Zack
No.
Ivan/Crocodile
Definitely not?
Zack
You're a poor performer, writer, person, everything. You have no grasp of politics, economics, law or art. Please, God, stop.
Ivan/Crocodile
You don't really –
Zack
I do.
Ivan/Crocodile
You don't know what I was going to say?
Zack
I do think that. And I always have. You're an embarrassment, Ivan.
Ivan begins to splutter a bit inside the crocodile.
Ivan? I'm sorry, I… Ivan? Are you crying in there or is that… I don't want to say crocodile tears, but I can't really avoid it now.
Beat.
I'm only saying this to help you –
Ivan/Crocodile
This is you helping, is it? Mate. Constantly stamping on my nuts, telling me I'm shit. Well, you can bloody keep it. I don't need it. I don't need you. There are people out there, good people, who value what I do. What I'm about.
Zack
I… are there?
Ivan/Crocodile
Who, piles of them, who enjoy, if not treasure, what I bring to the world. I overstepped the mark earlier, I know that now. I let the attention go to my head, and forgot what it was that people actually love about me.
Zack
What's that?
Ivan/Crocodile
The songs. My songs.
Zack
What, the stupid crocodile songs –?
Ivan/Crocodile
The Gazette called them 'mildly diverting', thank you!
74
Zack
I know, I was reading it –
Ivan/Crocodile
The Gazette, Zack. And in this fucked-up, dog-eat-dogshit, gang-bang of a universe, isn't a bit of diversion exactly what people need?
Zack
No.
Ivan/Crocodile
Isn't that the greatest service that I can provide? To make people happy. To forget their worries for one magic moment and just enjoy a man in a crocodile doing a song-and-dance number. Isn't that, when you think about it, the best thing that any of us can do? Ever?
Zack
No.
Ivan/Crocodile
If you think about it.
Zack
I have.
Ivan/Crocodile
If you think about it differently.
Zack
Ivan, that animal-story stuff this afternoon is who you are. That's what you think. You've been coming out with that crap for years.
Ivan/Crocodile
It was massively out of character –
Zack
No it wasn't. It was weird, yes, but at least it was you. Those songs are just… they're nothing. You just want to be popular again.
Ivan/Crocodile
How dare you!
Zack
That's what this is, though, right?
Ivan/Crocodile
You're disgusting. You disgust me.
Zack
You're scared you're not going to be famous any more.
Ivan/Crocodile
It's a little thing called 'humbility', mate.
Zack
Well, no, it's called 'humility' –
Ivan/Crocodile
I suggest you try it for once in your shit life.
Anya and Popov run in. Ivan returns the crocodile head to normal.
75
Anya
We need to get out of here!
Zack
Really? What's happening?
Anya
The angry mob's getting angrier and more of them –
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh Jesus…
Anya
They're doing punch-ups with some of your supporters.
Zack
Supporters? Are there supporters?
Ivan/Crocodile
Yes! You see, Zack!
Mr Popov
Yeah, all the pro-slavery lot –
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh my God, I am not pro-slavery!
Mr Popov
And some bloody copycat idiots trying to get inside the animals –
Zack
What? Why are they doing that?
Anya
They think it's a way to get famous –
Mr Popov
It's an absolute zoo and a half out there! There's a boy halfway in an elk, a dead girl in a hippo, one guy's got his leg in a penguin –
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, get them out! This is my thing –
Mr Popov
I'm not going back! That mob are mental, mate. The tinsel won't keep 'em out much longer.
Zack
Okay, well, maybe, can we smuggle him out a back way or something?
Popov grabs Ivan/CROCODILE and starts to lead him away.
Mr Popov
Right, yes! There's a fire exit by the flamingos.
Anya
Well, let's, Ivan, I think we have to get a move-on…
Ivan/CROCODILE throws them off him.
Ivan/Crocodile
Bring them in!
Beat. And he walks back to his little pit.
76
Mr Popov
You what?
Ivan/Crocodile
The mob. Bring them in, Popov.
Zack
Ivan, trust me, that's a very poor idea –
Ivan/Crocodile
And you can shut your bloody mouth, you doubting Judas! Bring 'em in, Popov. I'm going to fix this, right now.
Popov runs offstage. Anya walks over to Ivan.
Anya
Good for you, Ivan.
Mr Popov
(off) Right, in you come, then! Leave the placards outside! Placards! That thing you're holding, love. It's called a placard, yes! Come on…
The noise of a rabble coming into the room. Popov goes off and immediately comes back on as Sasha. A spotlight grows on Ivan/CROCODILE. Zack and Anya melt away. The rabble noise fades.
Ivan/Crocodile
Good evening. And thank you all for coming. I know that many of you are highly offended by some comments that were made here today, and for that I apologise unreservedly. I am not now and never have been pro-serfdom and it makes me sick to my guts that any of you could think that I was. I love farmers. I respect them. I'm proud that they've been freed. I'm not always able to express myself, you see, I am, at heart, a silly little croc who just wants to make you smile, but I want you to know that I love this country. A lot. And I love the brave men and women who work in the fields and in the factories and serve tirelessly in our armed forces at home and overseas. We are all the Tsar's loyal, loving subjects and now, thanks to his grace and goodness, forever, equal. My message, ladies and gents, is one of joy. And goodwill for all. Everything that exists is great and everything that doesn't probably shouldn't. I love and respect you all. And despite what the press are saying about me, I assure you that I have no ill-will for anything, apart from the obvious stuff like famine and paedos. I hate them. So I'm sorry. I've let you down, I've let77myself down, and, most of all, I've let our great emancipator, His Royal Highness Tsar Alexander II down. Please find it in your hearts to believe in me again. This is for you.
He starts to sing and dance.
Well I'm a sorry and apoloy-getic crocodile, I've got thick green skin, but I'm still fragile. I want to cheer you up, I want to see you smile, I'm a lovely little crocodile, that's right, I'm sunny, I'm a kinda funny, crocodile!
Freezes.
Thank you. I love you all. Thank you so much.
He bows and blows kisses. Sasha, in the audience, shouts out.
Sasha
Is that it?
Ivan/Crocodile
Sorry, what?
Sasha
Is the whole 'I'm sorry' routine meant to be enough to win back the public?
Ivan/Crocodile
I wouldn't know about that, mate, I'm just trying to do right by my audience and offer up a message of love and –
Sasha
But you're just doing another song?
Ivan/Crocodile
Yes… ideally, sorry, who are you?
Sasha
Sasha Ivkin, Daily Record, so what about the tax dodge then?
Ivan/Crocodile
I… I'd rather not talk about that –
Sasha
And the animal-cruelty stuff? What have you got to say about that?
Ivan/Crocodile
I, well, I think I've said what I need to say about that… I'm concentrating on my music and –
Sasha
Okay, see you later then, Croc…
Sasha starts to walk to the exit. Ivan/CROCODILE watches him go.
78
Ivan/Crocodile
Well no, hang on, don't go! There's more, there's, wait! I also decided some time ago, to give something back and therefore to… donate some, half of the money that I've made so far from my performances here at the zoo to… uh, crocodile-welfare… schemes, if there are any such, uh…
Sasha
I don't think there are –
Ivan/Crocodile
To set one up then! At last! To give everyone in society, especially poor… orphans, the chance to see and admire these most marvellous creatures.
Sasha
What's it called?
Ivan/Crocodile
It, the Ivan Matveitch Crocodile Trust will, for a mere nineteen thousand roubles, bring another crocodile to St Petersburg and… spoil it rotten, if that's, is that alright?
Sasha
And what do you think about the kid in the elk?
Ivan/Crocodile
The what?
Sasha
The fourteen-year-old kid who's now completely inside an elk.
Ivan/Crocodile
Well, I wish nothing but the best for anyone trying to get into this business, but I would remind you that I was the first and therefore –
Sasha
He's only fourteen though…
Sasha goes to make his way out.
Ivan/Crocodile
So? That doesn't mean that you should just… where are you going? An elk's easy! It's warm-blooded and, don't just go and gawp at some… teen! In an elk! I've got more stuff! Personal stuff.
Sasha
(stops) Yeah? What is it then?
Ivan/Crocodile
Right, yes, the other, personal reason, I invited you in here today is to… share with you all, a very special moment in my life. As I'm sure you can imagine, it's79both fascinating and odd living inside a crocodile, but what you maybe don't realise is that it's lonely. And I've decided that I don't want to do it alone. And that every Croc Monsieur needs, and perhaps deserves, a Croc Madame. And with that in mind –
Zack
What? No, Ivan, stop…!
Zack makes his way towards the spotlight. As does Anya.
Ivan/Crocodile
Not now, Zack –
Anya
Let him speak! Go on, Ivan…
He gets down on one knee.
Ivan/Crocodile
With that in mind, I'd like to ask my beloved Anne, light of my life, fire of my loins, to do me the honour of being my wife.
Anya
Oh, Ivan!
Dimitri appears onstage and puts his camera in front of Anya.
Dimitri
Anne! Over here!
Anya turns and poses for Dimitri – overwhelmed.
Zack
Anya, please, this is madness, he doesn't know what he's doing –
Ivan/Crocodile
Love is madness, Zack.
Zack
No, but, this isn't real! It's just a show. He doesn't want this, it's just to get people's attention –
Ivan/Crocodile
I love you, Annie.
Anya
I love you too, Ivan.
Zack
No, what? No you don't…
Ivan's hand comes out of the crocodile's mouth, holding a small red tube.
Ivan/Crocodile
This is some kind of… valve off one of the organs in here that, it's not an official engagement ring, but you get the idea –
80
Anya
Oh, wow, Ivan, I love it!
Ivan/Crocodile
I might have to put it back if the croc starts leaking –
Zack
Ivan. Stop this! This is…
(To the audience.) Stop watching this. Can you please… this is private…!
Ivan/Crocodile
I know everything's been a bit bonkers recently, Anne, but bottom line, babe, I'm just a boy, in a crocodile, standing in front of a girl, not in a crocodile, asking if he can marry the shit out of her.
Anya
I… yes! I will!
They pose again for Dimitri.
Zack
But, I mean, what?
Anya
I've never been happy with you, Zack, I'm sorry –
Zack
Well, don't… talk about this here –
Anya
You're holding me back, Zack, that's what you've always done. Installing me in that flat –
Zack
What? Installing? Do you mean… buying a flat?
Anya
Suffocating me with cushions –
Dimitri
What, really?
Zack
(to the audience) That's not… not literally –
Anya
I can't be with someone with your negativity, Zack, and height, I can't. I need to live and be free –
Ivan/Crocodile
Amen.
Anya
I need to be with Ivan.
Zack
But you can't be with him, this is… he's in there.
Ivan opens up the crocodile's mouth from the inside.
Ivan/Crocodile
I can't offer you much, Anne, but there is room enough for two…
81
Anya
Oh… really?
Zack
Are you fucking kidding me…?
Ivan/Crocodile
I won't lie, it's not The Ritz. It's more of a fixer-upper. Right now it's a crocodile's stomach, but soon, with your delicate touch, it could be a home.
Anya begins to make her way to the open jaws.
Zack
You're not actually going in there?
Anya
I have to, Zack. I'm sorry. This is what I was put on earth to do.
Zack
I mean… how can that possibly be true?
Anya waves to the crowd. And slowly lowers herself into the crocodile. Dimitri takes another photo.
Dimitri
Congratulations, Croc!
Ivan/Crocodile
Thank you. Thank you very much. All images will now have to be negotiated in advance, by the way.
Zack
Can we please, Anya, this is just ridiculous now…!
Anya is now in the crocodile. Trumpets outside.
Dimitri
The Tsar! The Tsar's here!
Dimitri runs offstage.
Zack
Yup, right, of course he is –
Ivan/Crocodile
Your Majesty!
The Crocodile kneels as the Tsar enters slowly (Popov in enormous crown and cape). He extends his hand for the Crocodile to kiss.
We are truly honoured, sire.
Tsar Alexander II
My dear Russians. Although I am your a divinely ordained leader, I stand here today as a fan.
Ivan/Crocodile
Oh wow… My Liege…
82
Tsar Alexander II
Let no one say that the Tsar does not take an interest in the popular cultural phenomena of the age. I am, like you, a huge supporter of whatever it is that is going on here that you all like so much.
Ivan/Crocodile
It's mainly song-and-dance numbers, Your Highness –
Tsar Alexander II
And I should add, that I have been truly moved by this crocodile's charming message of equality and patriotism. We are all equal in this country now, the final barriers of class and privilege have been cast aside and we all have the full freedom to flourish in any way that we see fit.
Ivan/Crocodile
Hear hear!
Tsar Alexander II
And let this talking animal's humble plea for joy and love be a beacon to you all to seek satisfaction and peace in your own lives, and not to question or complain or succumb to the poison of petty envy, but to fight these malignant political forces at work in our country, that wear the mask of common good but bring only destruction and chaos. We will look after you. We will entertain you. We will give you all that you need. Arise, Sir Crocodile, and let Russia salute you.
Ivan/Crocodile
At once, Your Majesty.
The Crocodile stands.
Tsar Alexander II
In pleasing my people, you please me. I thank you for your support, and now, hereafter, pledge you mine.
The Tsar kneels before the Crocodile and kisses his hand.
Trumpets. The Crocodile turns to face the audience. Regal. Defiant.
Blackout.
(Fixed gaze, tonelessly.) Finished, it's finished, nearly finished, it must be nearly finished. (Pause.) Grain upon grain, one by one, and one day, suddenly, there's a heap, a little heap, the impossible heap. (Pause.) I can't be punished any more. (Pause.) I'll go now to my kitchen, ten feet by ten feet by ten feet, and wait for him to whistle me. (Pause.) Nice dimensions, nice proportions, I'll lean on the table, and look at the wall, and wait for him to whistle me. (He remains a moment motionless, then goes out. He comes back immediately, goes to window right, takes up the ladder and carries it out. Pause. Hamm stirs. He yawns under the handkerchief. He removes the handkerchief from his face.Very red face. Black glasses.)
Hamm
Me – (he yawns) – to play. (He holds the handkerchief spread out before him.) Old stancher! (He takes off his glasses, wipes his eyes, his face, the glasses, puts them on again, folds the handkerchief and puts it neatly in the breast-pocket of his dressing-gown. He clears his throat, joins the tips of his fingers.) Can there be misery – (he yawns) – loftier than mine? No doubt. Formerly. But now? (Pause.) My father? (Pause.) My mother? (Pause.) My… dog? (Pause.) Oh I am willing to believe they suffer as much as such creatures can suffer. But does that mean their sufferings equal mine? No doubt. (Pause.) No, all is a – (he yawns) – bsolute, (proudly) the bigger a man is the fuller he is. (Pause. Gloomily.) And the emptier. (He sniffs.) Clov! (Pause.) No, alone. (Pause.) What dreams! Those forests! (Pause.) Enough, it's time it ended, in the refuge too. (Pause.) And yet I hesitate, I hesitate to… to end.Yes, there it is, it's time it ended and yet I hesitate to – (he yawns) – to end. (lawns.) God, I'm tired, I'd be 7better off in bed. (He whistles. Enter Clov immediately. He halts beside the chair.) You pollute the air (Pause.) Get me ready, I'm going to bed.
Clov
I've just got you up.
Hamm
And what of it?
Clov
I can't be getting you up and putting you to bed every five minutes, I have things to do.
Pause.
Hamm
Did you ever see my eyes?
Clov
No.
Hamm
Did you never have the curiosity, while I was sleeping, to take off my glasses and look at my eyes?
Clov
Pulling back the lids? (Pause.) No.
Hamm
One of these days I'll show them to you. (Pause.) It seems they've gone all white. (Pause.) What time is it?
Clov
The same as usual.
Hamm
(Gesture towards window right.) Have you looked?
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Well?
Clov
Zero.
Hamm
It'd need to rain.
Clov
It won't rain.
Pause.
Hamm
Apart from that, how do you feel?
Clov
I don't complain.
Hamm
You feel normal?
Clov
(irritably.) I tell you I don't complain!
Hamm
I feel a little queer. (Pause.) Clov!
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Have you not had enough?
Clov
Yes! (Pause.) Of what?
Hamm
Of this… this… thing.
Clov
I always had. (Pause.) Not you?
Hamm
(Gloomily.) Then there's no reason for it to change.
Clov
It may end. (Pause.) All life long the same questions, the same answers.
8
Hamm
Get me ready. (Clov does not move.) Go and get the sheet. (Clov does not move.) Clov!
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
I'll give you nothing more to eat.
Clov
Then we'll die.
Hamm
I'll give you just enough to keep you from dying.
You'll be hungry all the time.
Clov
Then we shan't die. (Pause.) I'll go and get the sheet.
He goes towards the door.
Hamm
No! (Clov halts.) I'll give you one biscuit per day.
(Pause.) One and a half. (Pause.) Why do you stay with me?
Clov
Why do you keep me?
Hamm
There's no one else.
Clov
There's nowhere else.
Pause.
Hamm
You're leaving me all the same.
Clov
I'm trying.
Hamm
You don't love me.
Clov
No.
Hamm
You loved me once.
Clov
Once!
Hamm
I've made you suffer too much. (Pause.) Haven't I?
Clov
It's not that.
Hamm
(Shocked.) I haven't made you suffer too much?
Clov
Yes!
Hamm
(Beli'eved.) Ah you gave me a fright! (Pause. Coldly.) Forgive me. (Pause. Louder.) I said, Forgive me.
Clov
I heard you. (Pause.) Have you bled?
Hamm
Less. (Pause.) Is it not time for my pain-killer?
Clov
No.
Pause.
Hamm
How are your eyes?
Clov
Bad.
Hamm
How are your legs?
Clov
Bad.
9
Hamm
But you can move.
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
(Violently.) Then move! (Clov goes to back wall, leans against it with his forehead and hands.) Where are you?
Clov
Here.
Hamm
Come back! (Clov returns to his place beside the chair.)
Where are you?
Clov
Here.
Hamm
Why don't you kill me?
Clov
I don't know the combination of the larder.
Pause.
Hamm
Go and get two bicycle-wheels.
Clov
There are no more bicycle-wheels.
Hamm
What have you done with your bicycle?
Clov
I never had a bicycle.
Hamm
The thing is impossible.
Clov
When there were still bicycles I wept to have one. I crawled at your feet.You told me to get out to hell. Now there are none.
Hamm
And your rounds? When you inspected my paupers.
Always on foot?
Clov
Sometimes on horse. (The lid of one of the bins lifts and the hands of Nagg appear, gripping the rim. Then his head emerges. Nightcap. Very white face. Nagg yawns, then listens.)
I'll leave you, I have things to do.
Hamm
In your kitchen?
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Outside of here it's death. (Pause.) All right, be off. (Exit Clov. Pause.) We're getting on.
Nagg
Me pap!
Hamm
Accursed progenitor!
Nagg
Me pap!
Hamm
The old folks at home! No decency left! Guzzle, guzzle, that's all they think of. (He whistles. Enter Clov. He halts beside the chair.) Well! I thought you were leaving me.
10
Clov
Oh not just yet, not just yet.
Nagg
Me pap!
Hamm
Give him his pap.
Clov
There's no more pap.
Hamm
(To Nagg.) Do you hear that? There's no more pap.
You'll never get any more pap.
Nagg
I want me pap!
Hamm
Give him a biscuit. (Exit Clov.) Accursed fornicator!
How are your stumps?
Nagg
Never mind me stumps.
Enter Clov with biscuit.
Clov
I'm back again, with the biscuit.
He gives the biscuit to Nagg who fingers it, sniffs it.
Nagg
(Plaintively.) What is it?
Clov
Spratt's medium.
Nagg
(As before.) It's hard! I can't!
Hamm
Bottle him!
Clov pushes Nagg back into the bin, closes the lid.
Clov
(Returning to his place beside the chair.) If age but knew!
Hamm
Sit on him!
Clov
I can't sit.
Hamm
True. And I can't stand.
Clov
So it is.
Hamm
Every man his speciality. (Pause.) No phone calls?
(Pause.) Don't we laugh?
Clov
(After reflection.) I don't feel like it.
Hamm
(After reflection.) Nor I. (Pause.) Clov!
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Nature has forgotten us.
Clov
There's no more nature.
Hamm
No more nature! You exaggerate.
Clov
In the vicinity.
Hamm
But we breathe, we change! We lose our hair, our teeth! Our bloom! Our ideals!
Clov
Then she hasn't forgotten us.
Hamm
But you say there is none.
11
Clov
(Sadly.) No one that ever lived ever thought so crooked as we.
Hamm
We do what we can.
Clov
We shouldn't.
Pause.
Hamm
You're a bit of all right, aren't you?
Clov
A smithereen.
Pause.
Hamm
This is slow work. (Pause.) Is it not time for my pain-killer?
Clov
No. (Pause.) I'll leave you, I have things to do.
Hamm
In your kitchen?
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
What, I'd like to know.
Clov
I look at the wall.
Hamm
The wall! And what do you see on your wall? Mene, mene? Naked bodies?
Clov
I see my light dying.
Hamm
Your light dying! Listen to that! Well, it can die just as well here, your light. Take a look at me and then come back and tell me what you think of your light.
Pause.
Clov
You shouldn't speak to me like that.
Pause.
Hamm
(Coldly.) Forgive me. (Pause. Louder.) I said, Forgive me.
Clov
I heard you.
The lid of Nagg's bin lifts. His hands appear, gripping the rim. Then his head emerges. In his mouth the biscuit. He listens.
Hamm
Did your seeds come up?
Clov
No.
Hamm
Did you scratch round them to see if they had sprouted?
Clov
They haven't sprouted.
Hamm
Perhaps it's still too early.
12
Clov
If they were going to sprout they would have sprouted.
(Violently.) They'll never sprout.
Pause. Nagg takes biscuit in his hand.
Hamm
This is not much fun. (Pause.) But that's always the way at the end of the day, isn't it, Clov?
Clov
Always.
Hamm
It's the end of the day like any other day, isn't it, Clov?
Clov
Looks like it.
Pause.
Hamm
(Anguished.) What's happening, what's happening?
Clov
Something is taking its course.
Pause.
Hamm
All right, be off. (He leans back in his chair, remains motionless. Clov does not move, heaves a great groaning sigh. Hamm sits up.) I thought I told you to be off.
Clov
I'm trying. (He goes to door, halts.) Ever since I was whelped.
Exit Clov.
Hamm
We're getting on.
He leans back in his chair, remains motionless. Nagg knocks on the lid of the other bin. Pause. He knocks harder. The lid lifts and the hands of Nell appear, gripping the rim. Then her head emerges. Lace cap.Very white face.
Nell
What is it, my pet? (Pause.) Time for love?
Nagg
Were you asleep?
Nell
Oh no!
Nagg
Kiss me.
Nell
We can't.
Nagg
Try.
Their heads strain towards each other, fail to meet, fall apart again.
Nell
Why this farce, day after day?
Pause.
Nagg
I've lost me tooth.
Nell
When?
13
Nagg
I had it yesterday.
Nell
(Elegiac.) Ah yesterday!
They turn painfully towards each other.
Nagg
Can you see me?
Nell
Hardly. And you?
Nagg
What?
Nell
Can you see me?
Nagg
Hardly.
Nell
So much the better, so much the better.
Nagg
Don't say that. (Pause.) Our sight has failed.
Nell
Yes.
Pause. They turn away from each other.
Nagg
Can you hear me?
Nell
Yes. And you?
Nagg
Yes. (Pause.) Our hearing hasn't failed.
Nell
Our what?
Nagg
Our hearing.
Nell
No. (Pause.) Have you anything else to say to me?
Nagg
Do you remember –
Nell
No.
Nagg
When we crashed on our tandem and lost our shanks.
They laugh heartily.
Nell
It was in the Ardennes.
They laugh less heartily.
Nagg
On the road to Sedan. (They laugh still less heartily.)
Are you cold?
Nell
Yes, perished. And you?
Nagg
I'm freezing. (Pause.) Do you want to go in?
Nell
Yes.
Nagg
Then go in. (Nell does not move.) Why don't you go in?
Nell
I don't know.
Pause.
Nagg
Has he changed your sawdust?
Nell
It isn't sawdust. (Pause. Wearily.) Can you not be a little accurate, Nagg?
Nagg
Your sand then. It's not important.
14
Nell
It is important.
Pause.
Nagg
It was sawdust once.
Nell
Once!
Nagg
And now it's sand. (Pause.) From the shore.
(Pause. Impatiently.) Now it's sand he fetches from the shore.
Nell
Now it's sand.
Nagg
Has he changed yours?
Nell
No.
Nagg
Nor mine. (Pause.) I won't have it! (Pause. Holding up the biscuit.) Do you want a bit?
Nell
No. (Pause.) Of what?
Nagg
Biscuit. I've kept you half. (He looks at the biscuit. Proudly.) Three quarters. For you. Here. (He proffers the biscuit.) No? (Pause.) Do you not feel well?
Hamm
(Wearily.) Quiet, quiet, you're keeping me awake. (Pause.) Talk softer. (Pause.) If I could sleep I might make love. I'd go into the woods. My eyes would see… the sky, the earth. I'd run, run, they wouldn't catch me. (Pause.) Nature! (Pause.) There's something dripping in my head. (Pause.) A heart, a heart in my head. (Pause.)
Nagg
(Soft.) Do you hear him? A heart in his head!
He chuckles cautiously.
Nell
One musn't laugh at those things, Nagg. Why must you always laugh at them?
Nagg
Not so loud!
Nell
(Without lowering her voice.) Nothing is funnier than unhappiness, I grant you that. But –
Nagg
(Shocked.) Oh!
Nell
Yes, yes, it's the most comical thing in the world. And we laugh, we laugh, with a will, in the beginning. But it's always the same thing. Yes, it's like the funny story we have heard too often, we still find it funny, but we don't laugh any more. (Pause.) Have you anything else to say to me?
15
Nagg
No.
Nell
Are you quite sure? (Pause.) Then I'll leave you.
Nagg
Do you not want your biscuit? (Pause.) I'll keep it for you. (Pause.) I thought you were going to leave me.
Nell
I am going to leave you.
Nagg
Could you give me a scratch before you go?
Nell
No. (Pause.) Where?
Nagg
In the back.
Nell
No. (Pause.) Rub yourself against the rim.
Nagg
It's lower down. In the hollow.
Nell
What hollow?
Nagg
The hollow! (Pause.) Could you not? (Pause.) Yesterday you scratched me there.
Nell
(Elegiac.) Ah yesterday!
Nagg
Could you not? (Pause.) Would you like me to scratch you? (Pause.) Are you crying again?
Nell
I was trying.
Pause.
Hamm
Perhaps it's a little vein.
Pause.
Nagg
What was that he said?
Nell
Perhaps it's a little vein.
Nagg
What does that mean? (Pause.) That means nothing.
(Pause.) Will I tell you the story of the tailor?
Nell
No. (Pause.) What for?
Nagg
To cheer you up.
Nell
It's not funny.
Nagg
It always made you laugh. (Pause.) The first time I thought you'd die.
Nell
It was on Lake Como. (Pause.) One April afternoon.
(Pause.) Can you believe it?
Nagg
What?
Nell
That we once went out rowing on Lake Como. (Pause.) One April afternoon.
Nagg
We had got engaged the day before.
Nell
Engaged!
16
Nagg
You were in such fits that we capsized. By rights we should have been drowned.
Nell
It was because I felt happy.
Nagg
(Indignant.) It was not, it was my story and nothing else. Happy! Don't you laugh at it still? Every time I tell it. Happy!
Nell
It was deep, deep. And you could see down to the bottom. So white. So clean.
Nagg
Let me tell it again. (Raconteur's voice.) An Englishman, needing a pair of striped trousers in a hurry for the New Year festivities, goes to his tailor who takes his measurements. (Tailor's voice.) 'That's the lot, come back in four days, I'll have it ready.' Good. Four days later. (Tailor's voice.) 'So sorry, come back in a week, I've made a mess of the seat.' Good, that's all right, a neat seat can be very ticklish. A week later. (Tailor's voice.) 'Frightfully sorry, come back in ten days, I've made a hash of the crutch.' Good, can't be helped, a snug crutch is always a teaser. Ten days later. (Tailor's voice.) 'Dreadfully sorry, come back in a fortnight, I've made a balls of the fly.' Good, at a pinch, a smart fly is a stiff proposition. (Pause. Normal voice.) I never told it worse. (Pause. Gloomy.) I tell this story worse and worse. (Pause. Raconteur's voice.) Well, to make it short, the bluebells are blowing and he ballockses the buttonholes. (Customer's voice.) 'God damn you to hell, Sir, no, it's indecent, there are limits! In six days, do you hear me, six days, God made the world. Yes Sir, no less Sir, the WORLD! And you are not bloody well capable of making me a pair of trousers in three months!' (Tailor's voice, scandalized.) 'But my dear Sir, my dear Sir, look – (disdainful gesture, disgustedly) – at the world – (pause) – and look – (loving gesture, proudly) – at my TROUSERS!'
Pause. He looks at Nell who has remained impassive, her eyes unseeing, breaks into a high forced laugh, cuts it short, pokes his head towards Nell, launches his laugh again.
17
Hamm
Silence!
Nagg starts, cuts short his laugh.
Nell
You could see down to the bottom.
Hamm
(Exasperated.) Have you not finished? Will you never finish? (With sudden fury.) Will this never finish? (Nagg disappears into his bin, closes the lid behind him. Nell does not move. Frenziedly.) My kingdom for a nightman! (He whistles. Enter Clov.) Clear away this muck! Chuck it in the sea! (Clov goes to bins, halts.)
Nell
So white.
Hamm
What? What's she blathering about?
Clov stoops, takes Nell's hand, feels her pulse.
Nell
(To Clov.) Desert!
Clov lets go her hand, pushes her back in the bin, closes the lid.
Clov
(Returning to his place beside the chair.) She has no pulse.
Hamm
What was she drivelling about?
Clov
She told me to go away, into the desert.
Hamm
Damn busybody! Is that all?
Clov
No.
Hamm
What else?
Clov
I didn't understand.
Hamm
Have you bottled her?
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Are they both bottled?
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Screw down the lids. (Clov goes towards door.) Time enough. (Clov halts.) My anger subsides, I'd like to pee.
Clov
(With alacrity.) I'll go and get the catheter.
He goes towards the door.
Hamm
Time enough. (Clov halts.) Give me my pain-killer.
Clov
It's too soon. (Pause.) It's too soon on top of your tonic, it wouldn't act.
Hamm
In the morning they brace you up and in the evening they calm you down. Unless it's the other way round.
(Pause.) That old doctor, he's dead, naturally?
18
Clov
He wasn't old.
Hamm
But he's dead?
Clov
Naturally. (Pause.) You ask me that?
Pause.
Hamm
Take me for a little turn. (Clov goes behind the chair and pushes it forward.) Not too fast! (Clov pushes chair.) Right round the world! (Clov pushes chair.) Hug the walls, then back to the centre again. (Clov pushes chair.) I was right in the centre, wasn't I?
Clov
(Pushing.) Yes.
Hamm
We'd need a proper wheel-chair.With big wheels. Bicycle wheels! (Pause.) Are you hugging?
Clov
(Pushing.) Yes.
Hamm
(Groping for wall.) It's a lie! Why do you lie to me?
Clov
(Bearing closer to wall.) There! There!
Hamm
Stop! (Clov stops chair close to back wall. Hamm lays his hand against wall.) Old wall! (Pause.) Beyond is the… other hell. (Pause. Violently.) Closer! Closer! Up against!
Clov
Take away your hand. (Hamm withdraws his hand. Clov rams chair against wall.) There!
Hamm leans towards wall, applies his ear to it.
Hamm
Do you hear? (He strikes the wall with his knuckles.) Do you hear? Hollow bricks! (He strikes again.) All that's hollow! (Pause. He straightens up. Violently.) That's enough.
Back!
Clov
We haven't done the round.
Hamm
Back to my place! (Clov pushes chair back to centre.) Is that my place?
Clov
Yes, that's your place.
Hamm
Am I right in the centre?
Clov
I'll measure it.
Hamm
More or less! More or less!
Clov
(Moving chair slightly.) There!
Hamm
I'm more or less in the centre?
Clov
I'd say so.
19
Hamm
You'd say so! Put me right in the centre!
Clov
I'll go and get the tape.
Hamm
Roughly! Roughly! (Clov moves chair slightly.) Bang in the centre!
Clov
There!
Pause.
Hamm
I feel a little too far to the left. (Clov moves chair slightly.) Now I feel a little too far to the right. (Clov moves chair slightly.) I feel a little too far forward. (Clov moves chair slightly.) Now I feel a little too far back.
(Clov moves chair slightly.) Don't stay there (i.e. behind the chair) , you give me the shivers.
Clov returns to his place beside the chair.
Clov
If I could kill him I'd die happy.
Pause.
Hamm
What's the weather like?
Clov
The same as usual.
Hamm
Look at the earth.
Clov
I've looked.
Hamm
With the glass?
Clov
No need of the glass.
Hamm
Look at it with the glass.
Clov
I'll go and get the glass.
Exit Clov.
Hamm
No need of the glass!
Enter Clov with telescope.
Clov
I'm back again, with the glass. (He goes to window right, looks up at it.) I need the steps.
Hamm
Why? Have you shrunk? (Exit Clov with telescope.) I don't like that, I don't like that.
Enter Clov with ladder, but without telescope.
Clov
I'm back again, with the steps. (He sets down ladder under window right, gets up on it, realizes he has not the telescope, gets down.) I need the glass.
He goes towards the door.
Hamm
(Violently.) But you have the glass!
20
Clov
(Halting, violently.) No I haven't the glass!
Exit Clov.
Hamm
This is deadly.
Enter Clov with telescope. He goes towards ladder.
Clov
Things are livening up. (He gets up on ladder, raises the telescope, lets it fall.) I did it on purpose. (He gets down, picks up the telescope, turns it on auditorium.) I see… a multitude… in transports… of joy. (Pause.) That's what I call a magnifier. (He lowers the telescope, turns towards Hamm.) Well? Don't we laugh?
Hamm
(After reflection.) I don't.
Clov
(After reflection.) Nor I. (He gets up on ladder, turns the telescope on the without.) Let's see. (He looks, moving the telescope.) Zero… (he looks) …zero… (he looks) …and zero.
Hamm
Nothing stirs. All is –
Clov
Zer –
Hamm
(Violently.) Wait till you're spoken to! (Normal voice.) All is… all is… all is what? (Violently.) All is what?
Clov
What all is? In a word? Is that what you want to know? Just a moment. (He turns the telescope on the without, looks, lowers the telescope, turns towards Hamm.) Corpsed.
(Pause.) Well? Content?
Hamm
Look at the sea.
Clov
It's the same.
Hamm
Look at the ocean!
Clov gets down, takes a few steps towards window left, goes back for ladder, carries it over and sets it down under window left, gets up on it, turns the telescope on the without, looks at length. He starts, lowers the telescope, examines it, turns it again on the without.
Clov
Never seen anything like that!
Hamm
(Anxious.) What? A sail? A fin? Smoke?
Clov
(Looking.) The light is sunk.
Hamm
(Relieved.) Pah! We all knew that.
Clov
(Looking.) There was a bit left.
21
Hamm
The base.
Clov
(Looking.) Yes.
Hamm
And now?
Clov
(Looking.) All gone.
Hamm
No gulls?
Clov
(Looking.) Gulls!
Hamm
And the horizon? Nothing on the horizon?
Clov
(Lowering the telescope, turning towards Hamm, exasperated.) What in God's name could there be on the horizon?
Pause.
Hamm
The waves, how are the waves?
Clov
The waves? (He turns the telescope on the waves.) Lead.
Hamm
And the sun?
Clov
(Looking.) Zero.
Hamm
But it should be sinking. Look again.
Clov
(Looking.) Damn the sun.
Hamm
Is it night already then?
Clov
(Looking.) No.
Hamm
Then what is it?
Clov
(Looking.) Grey. (Lowering the telescope, turning towards Hamm, louder.) Grey! (Pause. Still louder.) GRREY!
Pause. He gets down, approaches Hamm from behind, whispers in his ear.
Hamm
(Starting.) Grey! Did I hear you say grey?
Clov
Light black. From pole to pole.
Hamm
You exaggerate. (Pause.) Don't stay there, you give me the shivers.
Clov returns to his place beside the chair.
Clov
Why this farce, day after day?
Hamm
Routine. One never knows. (Pause.) Last night I saw inside my breast. There was a big sore.
Clov
Pah! You saw your heart.
Hamm
No, it was living. (Pause. Anguished.) Clov!
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
What's happening?
22
Clov
Something is taking its course.
Pause.
Hamm
Clov!
Clov
(Impatiently.) What is it?
Hamm
We're not beginning to… to… mean something?
Clov
Mean something! You and I, mean something! (Brief laugh.) Ah that's a good one!
Hamm
I wonder. (Pause.) Imagine if a rational being came back to earth, wouldn't he be liable to get ideas into his head if he observed us long enough. (Voice of rational being.) Ah, good, now I see what it is, yes, now I understand what they're at! (Clov starts, drops the telescope and begins to scratch his belly with both hands. Normal voice.) And without going so far as that, we ourselves… (with emotion) …we ourselves… at certain moments… (Vehemently.) To think perhaps it won't all have been for nothing!
Clov
(Anguished, scratching himself.) I have a flea!
Hamm
A flea! Are there still fleas?
Clov
On me there's one. (Scratching.) Unless it's a crablouse.
Hamm
(Very perturbed.) But humanity might start from there all over again! Catch him, for the love of God!
Clov
I'll go and get the powder.
Exit Clov.
Hamm
A flea! This is awful! What a day!
Enter Clov with a sprinkling-tin.
Clov
I'm back again, with the insecticide.
Hamm
Let him have it!
Clov loosens the top of his trousers, pulls it forward and shakes powder into the aperture. He stoops, looks, waits, starts, frenziedly shakes more powder, stoops, looks, waits.
Clov
The bastard!
Hamm
Did you get him?
Clov
Looks like it. (He drops the tin and adjusts his trousers.)
Unless he's laying doggo.
Hamm
Laying! Lying you mean. Unless he's lying doggo.
23
Clov
Ah? One says lying? One doesn't say laying?
Hamm
Use your head, can't you. If he was laying we'd be bitched.
Clov
Ah. (Pause.) What about that pee?
Hamm
I'm having it.
Clov
Ah that's the spirit, that's the spirit!
Pause.
Hamm
(With ardour.) Let's go from here, the two of us! South! You can make a raft and the currents will carry us away, far away, to other… mammals!
Clov
God forbid!
Hamm
Alone, I'll embark alone! Get working on that raft immediately. Tomorrow I'll be gone for ever.
Clov
(Hastening towards door.) I'll start straight away.
Hamm
Wait! (Clov halts.) Will there be sharks, do you think?
Clov
Sharks? I don't know. If there are there will be.
He goes towards door.
Hamm
Wait! (Clov halts.) Is it not yet time for my pain-killer?
Clov
(Violently.) No!
He goes towards door.
Hamm
Wait! (Clov halts.) How are your eyes?
Clov
Bad.
Hamm
But you can see.
Clov
All I want.
Hamm
How are your legs?
Clov
Bad.
Hamm
But you can walk.
Clov
I come… and go.
Hamm
In my house. (Pause. With prophetic relish.) One day you'll be blind, like me. You'll be sitting there, a speck in the void, in the dark, for ever, like me. (Pause.) One day you'll say to yourself, I'm tired, I'll sit down, and you'll go and sit down. Then you'll say, I'm hungry, I'll get up and get something to eat. But you won't get up. You'll say, I shouldn't have sat down, but since I have I'll sit on a little longer, then I'll get up and get something to eat. 24But you won't get up and you won't get anything to eat. (Pause.) You'll look at the wall a while, then you'll say, I'll close my eyes, perhaps have a little sleep, after that I'll feel better, and you'll close them. And when you open them again there'll be no wall any more. (Pause.) Infinite emptiness will be all around you, all the resurrected dead of all the ages wouldn't fill it, and there you'll be like a little bit of grit in the middle of the steppe. (Pause.) Yes, one day you'll know what it is, you'll be like me, except that you won't have anyone with you, because you won't have had pity on anyone and because there won't be anyone left to have pity on.
Pause.
Clov
It's not certain. (Pause.) And there's one thing you forget.
Hamm
Ah?
Clov
I can't sit down.
Hamm
(Impatiently.) Well, you'll lie down then, what the hell! Or you'll come to a standstill, simply stop and stand still, the way you are now. One day you'll say, I'm tired, I'll stop. What does the attitude matter?
Pause.
Clov
So you all want me to leave you.
Hamm
Naturally.
Clov
Then I'll leave you.
Hamm
You can't leave us.
Clov
Then I shan't leave you.
Pause.
Hamm
Why don't you finish us? (Pause.) I'll tell you the combination of the larder if you promise to finish me.
Clov
I couldn't finish you.
Hamm
Then you shan't finish me.
Pause.
Clov
I'll leave you, I have things to do.
Hamm
Do you remember when you came here?
Clov
No. Too small, you told me.
25
Hamm
Do you remember your father?
Clov
(Wearily.) Same answer. (Pause.) You've asked me these questions millions of times.
Hamm
I love the old questions. (With fervour.) Ah the old questions, the old answers, there's nothing like them! (Pause.) It was I was a father to you.
Clov
Yes. (He looks at Hamm fixedly.) You were that to me.
Hamm
My house a home for you.
Clov
Yes. (He looks about him.) This was that for me.
Hamm
(Proudly.) But for me (gesture towards himself) no father. But for Hamm (gesture towards surroundings) no home.
Pause.
Clov
I'll leave you.
Hamm
Did you ever think of one thing?
Clov
Never.
Hamm
That here we're down in a hole. (Pause.) But beyond the hills? Eh? Perhaps it's still green. Eh? (Pause.) Flora! Pomona! (Ecstatically.) Ceres! (Pause.) Perhaps you won't need to go very far.
Clov
I can't go very far. (Pause.) I'll leave you.
Hamm
Is my dog ready?
Clov
He lacks a leg.
Hamm
Is he silky?
Clov
He's a kind of Pomeranian.
Hamm
Go and get him.
Clov
He lacks a leg.
Hamm
Go and get him! (Exit Clov.) We're getting on.
Enter Clov holding by one of its three legs a black toy dog.
Clov
Your dogs are here.
He hands the dog to Hamm who feels it, fondles it.
Hamm
He's white, isn't he?
Clov
Nearly.
Hamm
What do you mean, nearly? Is he white or isn't he?
Clov
He isn't.
Pause.
26
Hamm
You've forgotten the sex.
Clov
(Vexed.) But he isn't finished.The sex goes on at the end.
Pause.
Hamm
You haven't put on his ribbon.
Clov
(Angrily.) But he isn't finished, I tell you! First you finish your dog and then you put on his ribbon!
Pause.
Hamm
Can he stand?
Clov
I don't know.
Hamm
Try. (He hands the dog to Clov who places it on the ground.) Well?
Clov
Wait!
He squats down and tries to get the dog to stand on its three legs, fails, lets it go. The dog falls on its side.
Hamm
(Impatiently.) Well?
Clov
He's standing.
Hamm
(Groping for the dog.) Where? Where is he?
Clov holds up the dog in a standing position.
Clov
There.
He takes Hamm's hand and guides it towards the dog's head.
Hamm
(His hand on the dog's head.) Is he gazing at me?
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
(Proudly.) As if he were asking me to take him for a walk?
Clov
If you like.
Hamm
(AS before.) Or as if he were begging me for a bone. (He withdraws his hand.) Leave him like that, standing there imploring me.
Clov straightens up. The dog falls on its side.
Clov
I'll leave you.
Hamm
Have you had your visions?
Clov
Less.
Hamm
Is Mother Pegg's light on?
Clov
Light! How could anyone's light be on?
27
Hamm
Extinguished!
Clov
Naturally it's extinguished. If it's not on it's extinguished.
Hamm
No, I mean Mother Pegg.
Clov
But naturally she's extinguished! (Pause.) What's the matter with you today?
Hamm
I'm taking my course. (Pause.) Is she buried?
Clov
Buried! Who would have buried her?
Hamm
You.
Clov
Me! Haven't I enough to do without burying people?
Hamm
But you'll bury me.
Clov
No I shan't bury you.
Pause.
Hamm
She was bonny once, like a flower of the field. (With reminiscent leer.) And a great one for the men!
Clov
We too were bonny – once. It's a rare thing not to have been bonny – once.
Pause.
Hamm
Go and get the gaff.
Clov goes to door, halts.
Clov
Do this, do that, and I do it. I never refuse. Why?
Hamm
You're not able to.
Clov
Soon I won't do it any more.
Hamm
You won't be able to any more. (Exit Clov.) Ah the creatures, the creatures, everything has to be explained to them.
Enter Clov with gaff.
Clov
Here's your gaff. Stick it up.
He gives the gaff to Hamm who, wielding it like a puntpole, tries to move his chair.
Hamm
Did I move?
Clov
No.
Hamm throws down the gaff.
Hamm
Go and get the oilcan.
Clov
What for?
Hamm
To oil the castors.
28
Clov
I oiled them yesterday.
Hamm
Yesterday! What does that mean? Yesterday!
Clov
(Violently.) That means that bloody awful day, long ago, before this bloody awful day. I use the words you taught me. If they don't mean anything any more, teach me others. Or let me be silent.
Pause.
Hamm
I once knew a madman who thought the end of the world had come. He was a painter – and engraver. I had a great fondness for him. I used to go and see him, in the asylum. I'd take him by the hand and drag him to the window. Look! There! All that rising corn! And there! Look! The sails of the herring fleet! All that loveliness! (Pause.) He'd snatch away his hand and go back into his corner. Appalled. All he had seen was ashes. (Pause.) He alone had been spared. (Pause.) Forgotten. (Pause.) It appears the case is… was not so… so unusual.
Clov
A madman? When was that?
Hamm
Oh way back, way back, you weren't in the land of the living.
Clov
God be with the days!
Pause. Hamm raises his toque.
Hamm
I had a great fondness for him. (Pause. He puts on his toque again.) He was a painter – and engraver.
Clov
There are so many terrible things.
Hamm
No, no, there are not so many now. (Pause.) Clov!
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Do you not think this has gone on long enough?
Clov
Yes! (Pause.) What?
Hamm
This… this… thing.
Clov
I've always thought so. (Pause.) You not?
Hamm
(Gloomily.) Then it's a day like any other day.
Clov
As long as it lasts. (Pause.) All life long the same inanities.
Pause.
29
Hamm
I can't leave you.
Clov
I know. And you can't follow me.
Pause.
Hamm
If you leave me how shall I know?
Clov
(Briskly.) Well you simply whistle me and if I don't come running it means I've left you.
Pause.
Hamm
You won't come and kiss me good-bye?
Clov
Oh I shouldn't think so.
Pause.
Hamm
But you might be merely dead in your kitchen.
Clov
The result would be the same.
Hamm
Yes, but how would I know, if you were merely dead in your kitchen?
Clov
Well… sooner or later I'd start to stink.
Hamm
You stink already. The whole place stinks of corpses.
Clov
The whole universe.
Hamm
(Angrily.) To hell with the universe! (Pause.) Think of something.
Clov
What?
Hamm
An idea, have an idea. (Angrily.) A bright idea!
Clov
Ah good. (He starts pacing to and fro, his eyes fixed on the ground, his hands behind his back. He halts.) The pains in my legs! It's unbelievable! Soon I won't be able to think any more.
Hamm
You won't be able to leave me. (Clov resumes his pacing.) What are you doing?
Clov
Having an idea. (He paces.) Ah!
He halts.
Hamm
What a brain! (Pause.) Well?
Clov
Wait! (He meditates. Not very convinced.) Yes…(Pause. More convinced.) Yes! (He raises his head.) I have it! I set the alarm.
Pause.
Hamm
This is perhaps not one of my bright days, but frankly –
30
Clov
You whistle me. I don't come. The alarm rings. I'm gone. It doesn't ring. I'm dead.
Pause.
Hamm
Is it working? (Pause. Impatiently.) The alarm, is it working?
Clov
Why wouldn't it be working?
Hamm
Because it's worked too much.
Clov
But it's hardly worked at all.
Hamm
(Angrily.) Then because it's worked too little!
Clov
I'll go and see. (Exit Clov. Brief ring of alarm off. Enter Clov with alarm-clock. He holds it against Hamm's ear and releases alarm. They listen to it ringing to the end. Pause.) Fit to wake the dead! Did you hear it?
Hamm
Vaguely.
Clov
The end is terrific!
Hamm
I prefer the middle. (Pause.) Is it not time for my pain-killer?
Clov
No! (He goes to the door, turns.) I'll leave you.
Hamm
It's time for my story. Do you want to listen to my story?
Clov
No.
Hamm
Ask my father if he wants to listen to my story.
Clov goes to bins, raises the lid of Nagg's, stoops, looks into it. Pause. He straightens up.
Clov
He's asleep.
Hamm
Wake him.
Clov stoops, wakes Nagg with the alarm. Unintelligible words. Clov straightens up.
Clov
He doesn't want to listen to your story.
Hamm
I'll give him a bon-bon.
Clov stoops. As before.
Clov
He wants a sugar-plum.
Hamm
He'll get a sugar-plum.
Clov stoops. As before.
Clov
It's a deal. (He goes towards door. Nagg's hands appear, gripping the rim. Then the head emerges. Clov reaches door, turns.) Do you believe in the life to come?
31
Hamm
Mine was always that. (Exit Clov.) Got him that time!
Nagg
I'm listening.
Hamm
Scoundrel! Why did you engender me?
Nagg
I didn't know.
Hamm
What? What didn't you know?
Nagg
That it'd be you. (Pause.) You'll give me a sugar-plum?
Hamm
After the audition.
Nagg
You swear?
Hamm
Yes.
Nagg
On what?
Hamm
My honour.
Pause. They laugh heartily.
Nagg
Two.
Hamm
One.
Nagg
One for me and one for
Hamm
One! Silence! (Pause.) Where was I? (Pause. Gloomily.) It's finished, we're finished. (Pause.) Nearly finished. (Pause.) There'll be no more speech. (Pause.) Something dripping in my head, ever since the fontanelles. (Stifled hilarity of Nagg.) Splash, splash, always on the same spot. (Pause.) Perhaps it's a little vein. (Pause.) A little artery. (Pause. More animated.) Enough of that, it's story time, where was I? (Pause. Narrative tone.) The man came crawling towards me, on his belly. Pale, wonderfully pale and thin, he seemed on the point of – (Pause. Normal tone.) No, I've done that bit. (Pause. Narrative tone.) I calmly filled my pipe – the meerschaum, lit it with… let us say a vesta, drew a few puffs. Aah! (Pause.) Well, what is it you want? (Pause.) It was an extra-ordinarily bitter day, I remember, zero by the thermometer. But considering it was Christmas Eve there was nothing… extra-ordinary about that. Seasonable weather, for once in a way. (Pause.) Well, what ill wind blows you my way? He raised his face to me, black with mingled dirt and tears. (Pause. Normal tone.) That should do it. (Narrative 32tone.) No, no, don't look at me, don't look at me. He dropped his eyes and mumbled something, apologies I presume. (Pause.) I'm a busy man, you know, the final touches, before the festivities, you know what it is. (Pause. Forcibly.) Come on now, what is the object of this invasion? (Pause.) It was a glorious bright day, I remember, fifty by the heliometer, but already the sun was sinking down into the… down among the dead. (Normal tone.) Nicely put, that. (Narrative tone.) Come on now, come on, present your petition and let me resume my labours. (Pause. Normal tone.) There's English for you. Ah well…(Narrative tone.) It was then he took the plunge. It's my little one, he said. Tsstss, a little one, that's bad. My little boy, he said, as if the sex mattered. Where did he come from? He named the hole. A good half-day, on horse. What are you insinuating? That the place is still inhabited? No no, not a soul, except himself and the child – assuming he existed. Good. I inquired about the situation at Kov, beyond the gulf. Not a sinner. Good. And you expect me to believe you have left your little one back there, all alone, and alive into the bargain? Come now! (Pause.) It was a howling wild day, I remember, a hundred by the anemometer. The wind was tearing up the dead pines and sweeping them… away. (Pause. Normal tone.) A bit feeble, that. (Narrative tone.) Come on, man, speak up, what is it you want from me, I have to put up my holly. (Pause.) Well to make it short it finally transpired that what he wanted from me was… bread for his brat. Bread? But I have no bread, it doesn't agree with me. Good. Then perhaps a little corn? (Pause. Normal tone.) That should do it. (Narrative tone.) Corn, yes, I have corn, it's true, in my granaries. But use your head. I give you some corn, a pound, a pound and a half, you bring it back to your child and you make him – if he's still alive – a nice pot of porridge (Nagg reacts) , a nice pot and a 33half of porridge, full of nourishment. Good. The colours come back into his little cheeks – perhaps. And then? (Pause.) I lost patience. (Violently.) Use your head, can't you, use your head, you're on earth, there's no cure for that! (Pause.) It was an exceedingly dry day, I remember, zero by the hygrometer. Ideal weather, for my lumbago. (Pause.Violently.) But what in God's name do you imagine? That the earth will awake in spring? That the rivers and seas will run with fish again? That there's manna in heaven still for imbeciles like you? (Pause.) Gradually I cooled down, sufficiently at least to ask him how long he had taken on the way. Three whole days. Good. In what condition he had left the child. Deep in sleep. (Forcibly.) But deep in what sleep, deep in what sleep already? (Pause.) Well to make it short I finally offered to take him into my service. He had touched a chord. And then I imagined already that I wasn't much longer for this world. (He laughs. Pause.) Well? (Pause.) Well? Here if you were careful you might die a nice natural death, in peace and comfort. (Pause.) Well? (Pause.) In the end he asked me would I consent to take in the child as well – if he were still alive. (Pause.) It was the moment I was waiting for. (Pause.) Would I consent to take in the child…(Pause.) I can see him still, down on his knees, his hands flat on the ground, glaring at me with his mad eyes, in defiance of my wishes. (Pause. Normal tone.) I'll soon have finished with this story. (Pause.) Unless I bring in other characters. (Pause.) But where would I find them? (Pause.) Where would I look for them? (Pause. He whistles. Enter Clov.) Let us pray to God.
Nagg
Me sugar-plum!
Clov
There's a rat in the kitchen!
Hamm
A rat! Are there still rats?
Clov
In the kitchen there's one.
Hamm
And you haven't exterminated him?
34
Clov
Half. You disturbed us.
Hamm
He can't get away?
Clov
No.
Hamm
You'll finish him later. Let us pray to God.
Clov
Again!
Nagg
Me sugar-plum!
Hamm
God first! (Pause.) Are you right?
Clov
(Resigned.) Off we go.
Hamm
(TO Nagg.) And you?
Nagg
(Clasping his hands, closing his eyes, in a gabble.) Our Father which art –
Hamm
Silence! In silence! Where are your manners? (Pause.)
Off we go. (Attitudes of prayer. Silence. Abandoning his attitude, discouraged.) Well?
Clov
(Abandoning his attitude.) What a hope! And you?
Hamm
Sweet damn all! (To Nagg.) And you?
Nagg
Wait! (Pause. Abandoning his attitude.) Nothing doing!
Hamm
The bastard! He doesn't exist!
Clov
Not yet.
Nagg
Me sugar-plum!
Hamm
There are no more sugar-plums!
Pause.
Nagg
It's natural. After all I'm your father. It's true if it hadn't been me it would have been someone else. But that's no excuse. (Pause.) Turkish Delight, for example, which no longer exists, we all know that, there is nothing in the world I love more. And one day I'll ask you for some, in return for a kindness, and you'll promise it to me. One must live with the times. (Pause.) Whom did you call when you were a tiny boy, and were frightened, in the dark? Your mother? No. Me. We let you cry. Then we moved you out of earshot, so that we might sleep in peace. (Pause.) I was asleep, as happy as a king, and you woke me up to have me listen to you. It wasn't indispensable, you didn't really need to have me listen to you. Besides I didn't listen to you. (Pause.) I hope the 35day will come when you'll really need to have me listen to you, and need to hear my voice, any voice. (Pause.) Yes, I hope I'll live till then, to hear you calling me like when you were a tiny boy, and were frightened, in the dark, and I was your only hope. (Pause. Nagg knocks on lid of Nell's bin. Pause.) Nell! (Pause. He knocks louder. Pause. Louder.) Nell! (Pause. Nagg sinks back into his bin, closes the lid behind him. Pause.)
Hamm
Our revels now are ended. (He gropes for the dog.) The dog's gone.
Clov
He's not a real dog, he can't go.
Hamm
(Groping.) He's not there.
Clov
He's lain down.
Hamm
Give him up to me. (Clov picks up the dog and gives it to Hamm. Hamm holds it in his arms. Pause. Hamm throws away the dog.) Dirty brute! (Clov begins to pick up the objects lying on the ground.) What are you doing?
Clov
Putting things in order. (He straightens up. Fervently.) I'm going to clear everything away!
He starts picking up again.
Hamm
Order!
Clov
(Straightening up.) I love order. It's my dream. A world where all would be silent and still and each thing in its last place, under the last dust.
He starts picking up again.
Hamm
(Exasperated.) What in God's name do you think you are doing?
Clov
(Straightening up.) I'm doing my best to create a little order.
Hamm
Drop it!
Clov drops the objects he has picked up.
Clov
After all, there or elsewhere.
He goes towards door.
Hamm
(Irritably.) What's wrong with your feet?
Clov
My feet?
Hamm
Tramp! Tramp!
36
Clov
I must have put on my boots.
Hamm
Your slippers were hurting you?
Pause.
Clov
I'll leave you.
Hamm
No!
Clov
What is there to keep me here?
Hamm
The dialogue. (Pause.) I've got on with my story.
(Pause.) I've got on with it well. (Pause. Irritably.) Ask me where I've got to.
Clov
Oh, by the way, your story?
Hamm
(Surprised.) What story?
Clov
The one you've been telling yourself all your… days.
Hamm
Ah you mean my chronicle?
Clov
That's the one.
Pause.
Hamm
(Angrily.) Keep going, can't you, keep going!
Clov
You've got on with it, I hope.
Hamm
(Modestly.) Oh not very far, not very far. (He sighs.) There are days like that, one isn't inspired. (Pause.) Nothing you can do about it, just wait for it to come. (Pause.) No forcing, no forcing, it's fatal. (Pause.) I've got on with it a little all the same. (Pause.) Technique, you know. (Pause. Irritably.) I say I've got on with it a little all the same.
Clov
(Admiringly.) Well I never! In spite of everything you were able to get on with it!
Hamm
(Modestly.) Oh not very far, you know, not very far, but nevertheless, better than nothing.
Clov
Better than nothing! Is it possible?
Hamm
I'll tell you how it goes. He comes crawling on his belly –
Clov
Who?
Hamm
What?
Clov
Who do you mean, he?
Hamm
Who do I mean! Yet another.
37
Clov
Ah him! I wasn't sure.
Hamm
Crawling on his belly, whining for bread for his brat. He's offered a job as gardener. Before – (Clov bursts out laughing.) What is there so funny about that?
Clov
A job as gardener!
Hamm
Is that what tickles you?
Clov
It must be that.
Hamm
It wouldn't be the bread?
Clov
Or the brat.
Pause.
Hamm
The whole thing is comical, I grant you that. What about having a good guffaw the two of us together?
Clov
(After reflection.) I couldn't guffaw again today.
Hamm
(After reflection.) Nor I. (Pause.) I continue then. Before accepting with gratitude he asks if he may have his little boy with him.
Clov
What age?
Hamm
Oh tiny.
Clov
He would have climbed the trees.
Hamm
All the little odd jobs.
Clov
And then he would have grown up.
Hamm
Very likely.
Pause.
Clov
Keep going, can't you, keep going!
Hamm
That's all. I stopped there.
Pause.
Clov
Do you see how it goes on.
Hamm
More or less.
Clov
Will it not soon be the end?
Hamm
I'm afraid it will.
Clov
Pah! You'll make up another.
Hamm
I don't know. (Pause.) I feel rather drained. (Pause.) The prolonged creative effort. (Pause.) If I could drag myself down to the sea! I'd make a pillow of sand for my head and the tide would come.
38
Clov
There's no more tide.
Pause.
Hamm
Go and see is she dead.
Clov goes to bins, raises the lid of Nell's, stoops, looks into it. Pause.
Clov
Looks like it.
He closes the lid, straightens up. Hamm raises his toque. Pause. He puts it on again.
Hamm
(With his hand to his toque.) And Nagg?
Clov raises lid of Nagg's bin, stoops, looks into it. Pause.
Clov
Doesn't look like it.
He closes the lid, straightens up.
Hamm
(Letting go his toque.) What's he doing?
Clov raises lid of Nagg's bin, stoops, looks into it. Pause.
Clov
He's crying.
He closes the lid, straightens up.
Hamm
Then he's living. (Pause.) Did you ever have an instant of happiness?
Clov
Not to my knowledge.
Pause.
Hamm
Bring me under the window. (Clov goes towards chair.) I want to feel the light on my face. (Clov pushes chair.) Do you remember, in the beginning, when you took me for a turn? You used to hold the chair too high. At every step you nearly tipped me out. (With senile quaver.) Ah great fun, we had, the two of us, great fun! (Gloomily.) And then we got into the way of it. (Clov stops the chair under window right.) There already? (Pause. He tilts back his head.) Is it light?
Clov
It isn't dark.
Hamm
(Angrily.) I'm asking you is it light?
Clov
Yes.
Pause.
Hamm
The curtain isn't closed?
Clov
No.
39
Hamm
What window is it?
Clov
The earth.
Hamm
I knew it! (Angrily.) But there's no light there! The other! (Clov pushes chair towards window left.) The earth! (Clov stops the chair under window left. Hamm tilts back his head.) That's what I call light! (Pause.) Feels like a ray of sunshine. (Pause.) No?
Clov
No.
Hamm
It isn't a ray of sunshine I feel on my face?
Clov
No.
Pause.
Hamm
Am I very white? (Pause. Angrily.) I'm asking you am I very white!
Clov
Not more so than usual.
Pause.
Hamm
Open the window.
Clov
What for?
Hamm
I want to hear the sea.
Clov
You wouldn't hear it.
Hamm
Even if you opened the window?
Clov
No.
Hamm
Then it's not worth while opening it?
Clov
No.
Hamm
(Violently.) Then open it! (Clov gets up on the ladder, opens the window. Pause.) Have you opened it?
Clov
Yes.
Pause.
Hamm
You swear you've opened it?
Clov
Yes.
Pause.
Hamm
Well…! (Pause.) It must be very calm. (Pause. Violently.) I'm asking you is it very calm?
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
It's because there are no more navigators. (Pause.) You haven't much conversation all of a sudden. Do you not feel well?
40
Clov
I'm cold.
Hamm
What month are we? (Pause.) Close the window, we're going back. (Clov closes the window, gets down, pushes the chair back to its place, remains standing behind it, head bowed.) Don't stay there, you give me the shivers! (Clov returns to his place beside the chair.) Father! (Pause. Louder.) Father! (Pause.) Go and see did he hear me. (Clov goes to Nagg's bin, raises the lid, stoops. Unintelligible words. Clov straightens up.)
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Both times?
Clov stoops. As before.
Clov
Once only.
Hamm
The first time or the second?
Clov stoops. As before.
Clov
He doesn't know.
Hamm
It must have been the second.
Clov
We'll never know.
He closes lid.
Hamm
Is he still crying?
Clov
No.
Hamm
The dead go fast. (Pause.) What's he doing?
Clov
Sucking his biscuit.
Hamm
Life goes on. (Clov returns to his place beside the chair.) Give me a rug, I'm freezing.
Clov
There are no more rugs.
Pause.
Hamm
Kiss me. (Pause.) Will you not kiss me?
Clov
No.
Hamm
On the forehead.
Clov
I won't kiss you anywhere.
Pause.
Hamm
(Holding out his hand.) Give me your hand at least. (Pause.) Will you not give me your hand?
Clov
I won't touch you.
Pause.
41
Hamm
Give me the dog. (Clov looks round for the dog.) No!
Clov
Do you not want your dog?
Hamm
NO.
Clov
Then I'll leave you.
Hamm
(Head bowed, absently.) That's right.
Clov goes to door, turns.
Clov
If I don't kill that rat he'll die.
Hamm
(AS before.) That's right. (Exit Clov. Pause.) Me to play. (He takes out his handkerchief, unfolds it, holds it spread out before him.) We're getting on. (Pause.) You weep, and weep, for nothing, so as not to laugh, and little by little… you begin to grieve. (He folds the handkerchief, puts it back in his pocket, raises his head.) All those I might have helped. (Pause.) Helped! (Pause.) Saved. (Pause.) Saved! (Pause.) The place was crawling with them! (Pause. Violently.) Use your head, can't you, use your head, you're on earth, there's no cure for that! (Pause.) Get out of here and love one another! Lick your neighbour as yourself! (Pause. Calmer.) When it wasn't bread they wanted it was crumpets. (Pause. Violently.) Out of my sight and back to your petting parties (Pause.) All that, all that! (Pause.) Not even a real dog! (Calmer.) The end is in the beginning and yet you go on. (Pause.) Perhaps I could go on with my story, end it and begin another. (Pause.) Perhaps I could throw myself out on the floor. (He pushes himself painfully off his seat, falls back again.) Dig my nails into the cracks and drag myself forward with my fingers. (Pause.) It will be the end and there I'll be, wondering what can have brought it on and wondering what can have…(he hesitates) …why it was so long coming. (Pause.) There I'll be, in the old refuge, alone against the silence and… (he hesitates) …the stillness. If I can hold my peace, and sit quiet, it will be all over with sound, and motion, all over and done with. (Pause.) I'll have called my father and I'll have called my… (he hesitates) …my son. And even twice, or three 42times, in case they shouldn't have heard me, the first time, or the second. (Pause.) I'll say to myself, He'll come back. (Pause.) And then? (Pause.) And then? (Pause.) He couldn't, he has gone too far. (Pause.) And then? (Pause. Very agitated.) All kinds of fantasies! That I'm being watched! A rat! Steps! Breath held and then… (he breathes out.) Then babble, babble, words, like the solitary child who turns himself into children, two, three, so as to be together, and whisper together, in the dark. (Pause.) Moment upon moment, pattering down, like the millet grains of… (he hesitates) …that old Greek, and all life long you wait for that to mount up to a life. (Pause. He opens his mouth to continue, renounces.) Ah let's get it over! (He whistles. Enter Clov with alarm-clock. He halts beside the chair.) What? Neither gone nor dead?
Clov
In spirit only.
Hamm
Which?
Clov
Both.
Hamm
Gone from me you'd be dead.
Clov
And vice versa.
Hamm
Outside of here it's death! (Pause.) And the rat?
Clov
He's got away.
Hamm
He can't go far. (Pause. Anxious.) Eh?
Clov
He doesn't need to go far.
Pause.
Hamm
Is it not time for my pain-killer?
Clov
Yes.
Hamm
Ah! At last! Give it to me! Quick!
Pause.
Clov
There's no more pain-killer.
Pause.
Hamm
(Appalled.) Good…! (Pause.) No more pain-killer!
Clov
No more pain-killer. You'll never get any more pain-killer.
Pause.
Hamm
But the little round box. It was full!
43
Clov
Yes. But now it's empty.
Pause. Clov starts to move about the room. He is looking for a place to put down the alarm-clock.
Hamm
(Soft.) What'll I do? (Pause. In a scream.) What'll I do?
Clov sees the picture, takes it down, stands it on the floor with its face to wall, hangs up the alarm-clock in its place.
What are you doing?
Clov
Winding up.
Hamm
Look at the earth.
Clov
Again!
Hamm
Since it's calling to you.
Clov
Is your throat sore? (Pause.) Would you like a lozenge? (Pause.) No? (Pause.) Pity.
Clov goes, humming, towards window right, halts before it, looks up at it.
Hamm
Don't sing.
Clov
(Turning towards Hamm.) One hasn't the right to sing any more?
Hamm
No.
Clov
Then how can it end?
Hamm
You want it to end?
Clov
I want to sing.
Hamm
I can't prevent you.
Pause. Clov turns towards window right.
Clov
What did I do with that steps? (He looks round for ladder.) You didn't see that steps? (He sees it.) Ah, about time. (He goes towards window left.) Sometimes I wonder if I'm in my right mind. Then it passes over and I'm as lucid as before. (He gets up on ladder, looks out of window.) Christ, she's under water! (He looks.) How can that be? (He pokes forward his head, his hand above his eyes.) It hasn't rained. (He wipes the pane, looks. Pause.) Ah what a mug I am! I'm on the wrong side! (He gets down, takes a few steps towards window right.) Under water! (He goes back for ladder.) What a mug I am! (He carries ladder towards window right.) Sometimes I wonder if I'm in my 44right senses. Then it passes off and I'm as intelligent as ever. (He sets down ladder under window right, gets up on it, looks out of window. He turns towards Hamm.) Any particular sector you fancy? Or merely the whole thing?
Hamm
Whole thing.
Clov
The general effect? Just a moment.
He looks out of window. Pause.
Hamm
Clov.
Clov
(Absorbed.) Mmm.
Hamm
Do you know what it is?
Clov
(As before.) Mmm.
Hamm
I was never there. (Pause.) Clov!
Clov
(Turning towards Hamm, exasperated.) What is it?
Hamm
I was never there.
Clov
Lucky for you.
He looks out of window.
Hamm
Absent, always. It all happened without me. I don't know what's happened. (Pause.) Do you know what's happened? (Pause.) Clov!
Clov
(Turning towards Hamm, exasperated.) Do you want me to look at this muckheap, yes or no?
Hamm
Answer me first.
Clov
What?
Hamm
Do you know what's happened?
Clov
When? Where?
Hamm
(Violently.) When! What's happened! Use your head, can't you! What has happened?
Clov
What for Christ's sake does it matter?
He looks out of window.
Hamm
I don't know.
Pause. Clov turns towards Hamm.
Clov
(Harshly.) When old Mother Pegg asked you for oil for her lamp and you told her to get out to hell, you knew what was happening then, no? (Pause.) You know what she died of, Mother Pegg? Of darkness.
Hamm
(Feebly.) I hadn't any.
45
Clov
(As before.) Yes, you had.
Pause.
Hamm
Have you the glass?
Clov
No, it's clear enough as it is.
Hamm
Go and get it.
Pause. Clov casts up his eyes, brandishes his fists. He loses balance, clutches on to the ladder. He starts to get down, halts.
Clov
There's one thing I'll never understand. (He gets down.) Why I always obey you. Can you explain that to me?
Hamm
No… Perhaps it's compassion. (Pause.) A kind of great compassion. (Pause.) Oh you won't find it easy, you won't find it easy.
Pause. Clov begins to move about the room in search of the telescope.
Clov
I'm tired of our goings on, very tired. (He searches.) You're not sitting on it?
He moves the chair, looks at the place where it stood, resumes his search.
Hamm
(Anguished.) Don't leave me there! (Angrily Clov restores the chair to its place.) Am I right in the centre?
Clov
You'd need a microscope to find this – (He sees the telescope.) Ah, about time.
He picks up the telescope, gets up on the ladder, turns the telescope on the without.
Hamm
Give me the dog.
Clov
(Looking.) Quiet!
Hamm
(Angrily.) Give me the dog!
Clov drops the telescope, clasps his hands to his head. Pause. He gets down precipitately, looks for the dog, sees it, picks it up, hastens towards Hamm and strikes him on the head violently with the dog.
Clov
There's your dog for you!
The dog falls to the ground. Pause.
Hamm
He hit me!
Clov
You drive me mad, I'm mad!
46
Hamm
If you must hit me, hit me with the axe. (Pause.) Or with the gaff, hit me with the gaff. Not with the dog. With the gaff. Or with the axe.
Clov picks up the dog and gives it to Hamm who takes it in his arms.
Clov
(Imploringly.) Let's stop playing!
Hamm
Never! (Pause.) Put me in my coffin.
Clov
There are no more coffins.
Hamm
Then let it end! (Clov goes towards ladder.) With a bang! (Clov gets up on ladder, gets down again, looks for telescope, sees it, picks it up, gets up ladder, raises telescope.) Of darkness! And me? Did anyone ever have pity on me?
Clov
(Lowering the telescope, turning towards Hamm.) What? (Pause.) Is it me you're referring to?
Hamm
(Angrily.) An aside, ape! Did you never hear an aside before? (Pause.) I'm warming up for my last soliloquy.
Clov
I warn you. I'm going to look at this filth since it's an order. But it's the last time. (He turns the telescope on the without.) Let's see. (He moves the telescope.) Nothing… nothing… good… good… nothing… goo–
(He starts, lowers the telescope, examines it, turns it again on the without. Pause.) Bad luck to it!
Hamm
More complications! (Clov gets down.) Not an underplot, I trust.
Clov moves ladder nearer window, gets up on it, turns telescope on the without.
Clov
(Dismayed.) Looks like a small boy!
Hamm
(Sarcastic.) A small… boy!
Clov
I'll go and see. (He gets down, drops the telescope, goes towards door, turns.) I'll take the gaff.
He looks for the gaff, sees it, picks it up, hastens towards door.
Hamm
No!
Clov halts.
Clov
No? A potential procreator?
47
Hamm
If he exists he'll die there or he'll come here. And if he doesn't…
Pause.
Clov
You don't believe me? You think I'm inventing?
Pause.
Hamm
It's the end, Clov, we've come to the end. I don't need you any more.
Pause.
Clov
Lucky for you.
He goes towards door.
Hamm
Leave me the gaff.
Clov gives him the gaff, goes towards door, halts, looks at alarm-clock, takes it down, looks round for a better place to put it, goes to bins, puts it on lid of Nagg's bin. Pause.
Clov
I'll leave you.
He goes towards door.
Hamm
Before you go… (Clov halts near door) …say something.
Clov
There is nothing to say.
Hamm
A few words… to ponder… in my heart.
Clov
Your heart!
Hamm
Yes. (Pause. Forcibly.) Yes! (Pause.) With the rest, in the end, the shadows, the murmurs, all the trouble, to end up with. (Pause.) Clov… He never spoke to me. Then, in the end, before he went, without my having asked him, he spoke to me. He said…
Clov
(despairingly.) Ah…!
Hamm
Something… from your heart.
Clov
My heart!
Hamm
A few words… from your heart.
Pause.
Clov
(Fixed gaze, tonelessly, towards auditorium.) They said to me, That's love, yes yes, not a doubt, now you see how –
Hamm
Articulate!
Clov
(As before.) How easy it is. They said to me. That's friendship, yes yes, no question, you've found it. They 48said to me, Here's the place, stop, raise your head and look at all that beauty. That order! They said to me, Come now, you're not a brute beast, think upon these things and you'll see how all becomes clear. And simple! They said to me, What skilled attention they get, all these dying of their wounds.
Hamm
Enough!
Clov
(As before.) I say to myself – sometimes, Clov, you must learn to suffer better than that if you want them to weary of punishing you – one day. I say to myself – sometimes, Clov, you must be there better than that if you want them to let you go – one day. But I feel too old, and too far, to form new habits. Good, it'll never end, I'll never go. (Pause.) Then one day, suddenly, it ends, it changes, I don't understand, it dies, or it's me, I don't understand that either. I ask the words that remain – sleeping, waking, morning, evening. They have nothing to say. (Pause.) I open the door of the cell and go. I am so bowed I only see my feet, if I open my eyes, and between my legs a little trail of black dust. I say to myself that the earth is extinguished, though I never saw it lit. (Pause.) It's easy going. (Pause.) When I fall I'll weep for happiness.
Pause. He goes towards door.
Hamm
Clov! (Clov halts, without turning.) Nothing. (Clov moves on.) Clov!
Clov halts, without turning.
Clov
This is what we call making an exit.
Hamm
I'm obliged to you, Clov. For your services.
Clov
(Turning, sharply.) Ah pardon, it's I am obliged to you.
Hamm
It's we are obliged to each other. (Pause. Clov goes towards door.) One thing more. (Clov halts.) A last favour. (Exit Clov.) Cover me with the sheet. (Long pause.) No? Good. (Pause.) Me to play. (Pause. Wearily.) Old endgame lost of old, play and lose and have done with losing. (Pause. More animated.) Let me see. (Pause.) 49Ah yes! (He tries to move the chair, using the gaff as before. Enter Clov, dressed for the road. Panama hat, tweed coat, raincoat over his arm, umbrella, bag. He halts by the door and stands there, impassive and motionless, his eyes fixed on Hamm, till the end. Hamm gives up.) Good. (Pause.) Discard. (He throws away the gaff, makes to throw away the dog, thinks better of it.) Take it easy. (Pause.) And now? (Pause.) Raise hat. (He raises his toque.) Peace to our… arses. (Pause.) And put on again. (He puts on his toque.) Deuce. (Pause. He takes off his glasses.) Wipe. (He takes out his handkerchief and, without unfolding it, wipes his glasses.) And put on again. (He puts on his glasses, puts back the handkerchief in his pocket.) We're coming. A few more squirms like that and I'll call. (Pause.) A little poetry. (Pause.) You prayed – (Pause. He corrects himself.) You CRIED for night; it comes – (Pause. He corrects himself.) It FALLS: now cry in darkness. (He repeats, chanting.) You cried for night; it falls: now cry in darkness. (Pause.) Nicely put, that. (Pause.) And now? (Pause.) Moments for nothing, now as always, time was never and time is over, reckoning closed and story ended. (Pause. Narrative tone.) If he could have his child with him… (Pause.) It was the moment I was waiting for. (Pause.) You don't want to abandon him? You want him to bloom while you are withering? Be there to solace your last million last moments? (Pause.) He doesn't realize, all he knows is hunger, and cold, and death to crown it all. But you! You ought to know what the earth is like, nowadays. Oh, I put him before his responsibilities! (Pause. Normal tone.) Well, there we are, there I am, that's enough. (He raises the whistle to his lips, hesitates, drops it. Pause.) Yes, truly! (He whistles. Pause. Louder. Pause.) Good. (Pause.) Father! (Pause. Louder.) Father! (Pause.) Good. (Pause.) We're coming. (Pause.) And to end up with? (Pause.) Discard. (He throws away the dog. He tears the whistle from his neck.) With my compliments. (He throws whistle towards 50auditorium. Pause. He sniffs. Soft.) Clov! (Long pause.) No? Good. (He takes out the handkerchief.) Since that's the way we're playing it… (he unfolds handkerchief) …let's play it that way… (he unfolds) …and speak no more about it… (he finishes unfolding) …speak no more. (He holds the handkerchief spread out before him.) Old stancher! (Pause.) You… remain. (Pause. He covers his face with handkerchief, lowers his arms to armrests, remains motionless.)
Brief tableau.
Alexander
'Semyon is right. Why live?'
Curtain. Stage in darkness.
Faint single chime. Pause as echoes die.
Fade up to dim on strip. Rest in darkness.
M discovered pacing towards L. Turns at L, paces three more lengths, halts, facing front at R.
Pause.
May (M)
Mother. (Pause. No louder.) Mother.
Pause.
Woman's Voice (V)
Yes, May.
May (M)
Were you asleep?
Woman's Voice (V)
Deep asleep. (Pause.) I heard you in my deep sleep. (Pause.) There is no sleep so deep I would not hear you there.
(Pause. M resumes pacing. Four lengths. After first length, 110synchronous with steps.) One two three four five six seven eight nine wheel one two three four five six seven eight nine wheel. (Free.) Will you not try to snatch a little sleep? (M halts facing front at R. Pause.)
May (M)
Would you like me to inject you again?
Woman's Voice (V)
Yes, but it is too soon.
Pause.
May (M)
Would you like me to change your position again?
Woman's Voice (V)
Yes, but it is too soon.
Pause.
May (M)
Straighten your pillows? (Pause.) Change your drawsheet? (Pause.) Pass you the bedpan? (Pause.) The warming-pan? (Pause.) Dress your sores? (Pause.) Sponge you down? (Pause.) Moisten your poor lips? (Pause.) Pray with you? (Pause.) For you? (Pause.) Again.
Pause.
Woman's Voice (V)
Yes, but it is too soon.
Pause.
May (M)
What age am I now?
Woman's Voice (V)
And I? (Pause. No louder.) And I?
May (M)
Ninety.
Woman's Voice (V)
So much?
May (M)
Eighty-nine, ninety.
Woman's Voice (V)
I had you late. (Pause.) In life. (Pause.) Forgive me again. (Pause. No louder.) Forgive me again. (M resumes pacing. After one length halts facing front at L. Pause.)
May (M)
What age am I now?
Woman's Voice (V)
In your forties.
May (M)
So little?
Woman's Voice (V)
I'm afraid so. (Pause. M resumes pacing. After first turn at L.) May. (Pause. No louder.) May.
May (M)
(Pacing.) Yes, Mother.
Woman's Voice (V)
Will you never have done? (Pause.) Will you never have done… revolving it all?
May (M)
(Halting.) It?
111
Woman's Voice (V)
It all. (Pause.) In your poor mind. (Pause.) It all. (Pause.) It all.
M resumes pacing. Five seconds. Fade out on strip.
All in darkness. Steps cease.
Pause.
Chime a little fainter. Pause for echoes.
Fade up to a little less on strip. Rest in darkness.
M discovered facing front at R.
Pause.
Woman's Voice (V)
I walk here now. (Pause.) Rather I come and stand. (Pause.) At nightfall. (Pause.) She fancies she is alone. (Pause.) See how still she stands, how stark, with her face to the wall. (Pause.) How outwardly unmoved. (Pause.) She has not been out since girlhood. (Pause.) Not out since girlhood. (Pause.) Where is she, it may be asked. (Pause.) Why, in the old home, the same where she—(Pause.) The same where she began. (Pause.) Where it began. (Pause.) It all began. (Pause.) But this, this, when did this begin? (Pause.) When other girls of her age were out at… lacrosse she was already here. (Pause.) At this. (Pause.) The floor here, now bare, once was—(M begins pacing. Steps a little slower.) But let us watch her move, in silence. (M paces. Towards end of second length.) Watch how feat she wheels. (M turns, paces. Synchronous with steps third length.) Seven, eight, nine, wheel. (M turns at L, paces one more length, halts facing front at R.) I say the floor here, now bare, this strip of floor, once was carpeted, a deep pile. Till one night, while still little more than a child, she called her mother and said, Mother, this is not enough. The mother: Not enough? May—the child's given name—May: Not enough. The mother: What do you mean, May, not enough, what can you possibly mean, May, not enough? May: I mean, Mother, that I must hear the feet, however faint they fall. The mother: The motion alone is not enough? May: No, Mother, the motion alone is not enough, I must hear the feet, however faint they fall. 112(Pause. M resumes pacing. With pacing.) Does she still sleep, it may be asked? Yes, some nights she does, in snatches, bows her poor head against the wall and snatches a little sleep. (Pause.) Still speak? Yes, some nights she does, when she fancies none can hear. (Pause.) Tells how it was. (Pause.) Tries to tell how it was. (Pause.) It all. (Pause.) It all. (M continues pacing. Five seconds. Fade out on strip. All in darkness, Steps cease. Pause. Chime a little fainter still. Pause for echoes. Fade up to a little less still on strip. Rest in darkness. M discovered facing front at R. Pause.)
May (M)
Sequel. (Pause. Begins pacing. Steps a little slower still. After two lengths halts facing front at R. Pause.) Sequel. A little later, when she was quite forgotten, she began to—(Pause.) A little later, when as though she had never been, it never been, she began to walk. (Pause.) At nightfall. (Pause.) Slip out at nightfall and into the little church by the north door, always locked at that hour, and walk, up and down, up and down, His poor arm. (Pause.) Some nights she would halt, as one frozen by some shudder of the mind, and stand stark still till she could move again. But many also were the nights when she paced without pause, up and down, up and down, before vanishing the way she came. (Pause.) No sound. (Pause.) None at least to be heard. (Pause.) The semblance. (Pause. Resumes pacing. After two lengths halts facing front at R. Pause.) The semblance. Faint, though by no means invisible, in a certain light. (Pause.) Given the right light. (Pause.) Grey rather than white, a pale shade of grey. (Pause.) Tattered. (Pause.) A tangle of tatters. (Pause.) Watch it pass—(Pause.) —watch her pass before the candelabrum, how its flames, their light… like moon through passing rack. (Pause.) Soon then after she was gone, as though never there, began to walk, up and down, up and down, that 113poor arm. (Pause.) At nightfall. (Pause.) That is to say, at certain seasons of the year, during Vespers. (Pause.) Necessarily. (Pause. Resumes pacing. After one length halts facing front at L. Pause.) Old Mrs Winter, whom the reader will remember, old Mrs Winter, one late autumn Sunday evening, on sitting down to supper with her daughter after worship, after a few half-hearted mouthfuls laid down her knife and fork and bowed her head. What is it, Mother, said the daughter, a most strange girl, though scarcely a girl any more… (Brokenly.) …dreadfully un—… (Pause. Normal voice.) What is it, Mother, are you not feeling yourself? (Pause.) Mrs W. did not at once reply. But finally, raising her head and fixing Amy—the daughter's given name, as the reader will remember—raising her head and fixing Amy full in the eye she said—(Pause.) —she murmured, fixing Amy full in the eye she murmured, Amy did you observe anything… strange at Evensong? Amy: No, Mother, I did not. Mrs W: Perhaps it was just my fancy. Amy: Just what exactly, Mother, did you perhaps fancy it was? (Pause.) Just what exactly, Mother, did you perhaps fancy this… strange thing was you observed? (Pause.) Mrs W:You yourself observed nothing… strange? Amy: No, Mother, I myself did not, to put it mildly. Mrs W: What do you mean, Amy, to put it mildly, what can you possibly mean, Amy, to put it mildly? Amy: I mean, Mother, that to say I observed nothing… strange is indeed to put it mildly. For I observed nothing of any kind, strange or otherwise. I saw nothing, heard nothing, of any kind. I was not there. Mrs W: Not there? Amy: Not there. Mrs W: But I heard you respond. (Pause.) I heard you say Amen. (Pause.) How could you have responded if you were not there? (Pause.) How could you possibly have said Amen if, as you claim, you were not there? (Pause.) The love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all, now, and for evermore. Amen. (Pause.) I heard you distinctly. (Pause. Resumes pacing. 114After three steps halts without facing front. Long pause. Resumes pacing, halts facing front at R. Long pause.) Amy. (Pause. No louder.) Amy. (Pause.) Yes, Mother. (Pause.) Will you never have done?
(Pause.) Will you never have done… revolving it all?
(Pause.) It? (Pause.) It all. (Pause.) In your poor mind.
(Pause.) It all. (Pause.) It all.
Pause. Fade out on strip. All in darkness.
Pause.
Chime even a little fainter still. Pause for echoes.
Fade up to even a little less still on strip.
No trace of May.
Hold ten seconds.
Fade out.
CURTAIN
Scene: an ordinary living room.
Mr Brandywine sits in a backless chair at one side of the stage with his back to the other characters. He is probably over forty, but otherwise of indeterminate age; he is wearing a dark jacket from one suit and trousers which more or less match from another. A wig conceals a completely bald head. He can be reading a small paperback book, but is quite motionless throughout – more like a human doorstop than anything else. Mrs Brandywine is a woman in her early forties, whose manner has a sort of surface equanimity which may well conceal hidden depths of neurosis. She has on a good plain grey dress. She sits with her back to both her husband and the door; she is sorting through a number of what appear to be quarto-size photographs until she holds up one for inspection at arm's length which is seen to be a full-sized handprint, such as a palmist might find useful. She starts up at the sound of a voice off. It is full of booming resonance. It belongs to a Man with a briefcase, who, when he appears, is large and dominant and may well be a salesman. If not, then he is in all probability either a practitioner of psychiatric hypnotism or a trade unionist turned marriage guidance counsellor. Failing this, he can only be a rent collector without portfolio. At all events, he is brisk and in control throughout, and at his most disquieting when least emphatic. He catches Mrs Brandywine on the wrong foot at the outset and thwarts every attempt she makes to regain her balance by tilting the ground under her whenever she seems to have steadied herself.
108
Man
(off) Mrs Brandywine?
Mrs Brandywine starts up. The Man enters.
In here, is it? Ah – there you are, Mrs Brandywine.
Mrs Brandywine
(at a loss) Good morning.
Man
(tapping the door handle) How are your handles? Fit the hand, do they? More or less?
Mrs Brandywine
(hesitant) Yes. Yes – I should say they do. On the whole.
Man
Good.
He stands back a pace or two from the door and casts a professional eye at the handle.
What are they like to look at?
Mrs Brandywine
To what?
Man
(glancing up at her) When you look at them, do they give you any particular feeling? Revulsion? Contempt? Anything of that sort? Nausea?
Mrs Brandywine
Not in the ordinary way. No, I can't say they do.
The Man turns abruptly and crosses to the table, uninvited, where he sets down his briefcase and begins to open it.
Man
You see, handles are funny things, Mrs Brandywine. You don't mind if I come in a moment? These aren't my outdoor shoes and the sooner I get inside…
Mrs Brandywine
Of course not. Come in.
Man
Thank you very much, Mrs. Brandywine. A cup of tea would be very welcome if you could manage it.
Mrs Brandywine
(flustered still) Yes. I've got one outside.
109
Mrs Brandywine exits.
Man
It's nearly four hours since I had anything.
Mrs Brandywine reappears.
Mrs Brandywine
Hot or cold
Man
(taking papers out of his briefcase and closing it; without looking up) Depends entirely on the temperature, Mrs Brandywine.
Mrs Brandywine goes out again. The Man surveys the room, examining handles. Mrs Brandywine returns with a cup of tea.
I've been looking at your handles, Mrs Brandywine.
Mrs Brandywine sets down a teacup and saucer, and begins to recover her composure.
Mrs Brandywine
Do you like them?
Man
Very nice. A present from someone, I expect.
Mrs Brandywine
No, not really.
Man
Keepsake, perhaps – eh? Former lover? Childhood sweetheart?
Mrs Brandywine
Good gracious, no. There's no secret about those.
Man
Oh?
Mrs Brandywine
They were there when we came.
Man
But how did they get there, Mrs Brandywine?
Mrs Brandywine is brought up short by this question, and keeps a very precarious hold on her poise during the following colloquy.
Two handles on each door – one on either side. They didn't come there by accident.
110
Mrs Brandywine
I've never really thought about it, to tell you the truth.
Man
I'm asking you to think about it now, Mrs Brandywine.
Mrs Brandywine
Unless the builder put them there.
Man
I see.
Mrs Brandywine
For some reason.
Man
What else was he responsible for?
Mrs Brandywine
What else?
Man
The builder. Besides the handles.
Mrs Brandywine
Oh. Well, everything really. Oh, yes – he was very good.
Man
(looking at her) I see.
Mrs Brandywine
Made all the arrangements. I didn't have to do a thing. Doors, windows, ceilings.
Man
Took complete charge, in other words.
Mrs Brandywine
Yes. I left it entirely to him, I'm afraid.
Man
Chimneys?
Mrs Brandywine
Chimneys. Roof. Drains. I wouldn't have known where to start. But he seemed to have it all organised.
Man
You were reasonably satisfied, were you? On the whole?
Mrs Brandywine
Very much so.
Man
Plumbing?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, yes.
Man
No snags there?
111
Mrs Brandywine
Not that I could see. We had pipes, and outlets for the water. Bath upstairs. Everything – even down to the washers on the taps. And plugs, for the washbasins.
Man
He seems to have thought of everything.
Mrs Brandywine
Quite honestly we should have been lost without him.
Man
What did he charge you?
Mrs Brandywine
I really can't remember now. I expect he put a bit on the bill – but whatever it was, I didn't begrudge a penny.
Man
I'm sure you didn't. (He peers out through a window.) How far can you see through these windows?
Mrs Brandywine
It depends, really.
Man
What are these? Shelves?
Mrs Brandywine
Some are shelves. Some are ledges.
Man
Getting proper support from them?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, yes. I can't complain.
Man
I'm not asking you to complain, Mrs Brandywine.
Mrs Brandywine
I'm more than satisfied with them, actually.
Man
Recesses go back far enough?
Mrs Brandywine
Just right, really.
Man
Not too deep?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, no.
Man
Nice upright walls.
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, yes. They're very vertical.
112
Man
(looking round the room) I don't see the floor anywhere.
Mrs Brandywine
It's under the carpet.
Man
Making full use of it, I hope.
Mrs Brandywine
It's just so that we've got something to walk about on, really.
Man
What length are your floorboards?
Mrs Brandywine
I'll get a tape measure.
She finds one in a drawer, but never gets round to using it.
Man
Wallpaper? That seems to be missing.
Mrs Brandywine
We've had it all pushed back against the wall.
Man
(looking first at the wall, then significantly at Mrs Brandywine) Why have you done that, Mrs Brandywine
Mrs Brandywine
It gives us more space. In the middle.
Man
Space?
Mrs Brandywine
In case we have people in.
Man
What sort of people?
Mrs Brandywine
I can tell you better when they've been, really.
Man
I'd rather you told me now, Mrs Brandywine.
Mrs Brandywine
People vary so.
Man
You could give me a rough idea.
Mrs Brandywine
Well…
Man
Total strangers? Friends of the family? Horsemen of the Apocalypse?
113
Mrs Brandywine
It's hard to say. I suppose some of them might be.
Man
And the others?
Mrs Brandywine
I'd only be guessing.
Man
Laundry workers, perhaps?
Mrs Brandywine
I just couldn't say till I've seen them.
The Man goes dubiously back to the table where he sits down to fill in the questionnaire he took out of his briefcase earlier.
Man
(looking up in a disenchanted way) Where are your colanders?
Mrs Brandywine
(a little anxious to make amends) There's one in the kitchen.
She makes tentatively for the door.
Man
Plenty of holes?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, yes. Any amount.
Man
(stopping short) Any amount?
Mrs Brandywine
It's chock-a-block with holes.
The Man continues looking at her.
I don't know what to do with them sometimes. (A little wildly.) I'm falling over them. There's just too many. You don't need all that many. There's no room for anything else.
Man
You don't know the exact number?
Mrs Brandywine
Not offhand. I'm afraid I don't.
Man
(returning to the form) Sieves all letting the small stuff through?
114
Mrs Brandywine
So far, touch wood.
The Man makes one or two jottings, puts the paper back in his briefcase and seems to relax. His eye as he does this is caught by a tea cosy knitted in bright colours. He momentarily interrupts himself to pick it up, comment and put it down again.
Man
Pretty.
Mrs Brandywine
Do you like it?
Man
Attractive colours.
Mrs Brandywine
It's a tea cosy.
Man
Did you knit it, Mrs Brandywine?
Mrs Brandywine
I did and I didn't, really.
Man
Had an accomplice, very likely.
Mrs Brandywine
I wouldn't call it that exactly.
Man
Why not, Mrs Brandywine?
Mrs Brandywine
Unless you call Mrs Prebabel an accomplice.
Man
What's wrong with calling her Mrs Prebabel?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, nothing at all.
Man
It's her name presumably?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, yes.
Man
Not an alias, or anything of that sort?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, no. It's her proper name. She married a Mr Prebabel.
Man
Then why are you asking me to call her an accomplice, Mrs Brandywine?
Mrs Brandywine
It's just that she helped me with the tea cosy.
115
Man
Oh?
Mrs Brandywine
(becoming a little wild again) She held the needles. I looked after the wool.
Man
I see.
Mrs Brandywine
We were in it together, as you might say.
Man
In other words you were just as much an accomplice as Mrs Prebabel was?
Mrs Brandywine
If you put it like that, I suppose I was.
Pause, during which the Man looks intently at Mrs Brandywine before changing course. He closes his briefcase with a snap, takes it up and makes for the door.
Man
(speaking without looking at her) Not always very sure of yourself, are you, Mrs Brandywine?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh…
Man
Some of your answers could come a little more pat.
He checks on seeing Mr Brandywine for the first time and goes towards him inquisitively.
You should try to get a lot more glibness into your whole approach. (Looking back at her.) This is new.
Mrs Brandywine
It's my husband.
Man
(looking him over from various angles) Everything functioning?
Mrs Brandywine
Oh, yes.
The Man lifts Mr Brandywine's wig to reveal a totally bald head.
Man
(accusingly) Except his hormones.
116
Mrs Brandywine
I've tried everything.
Man
What does he weigh?
Mrs Brandywine
Naked?
Man
Dressed.
Mrs Brandywine
Eleven stone twelve.
Man
(trying the chair with his foot) The chair's taking most of that.
Mrs Brandywine
He manages on what's left.
Man
(about to go) Is he serving any purpose? Sitting there?
Mrs Brandywine
(wildly trying to be more glib) Only to keep the floorboards in position.
Man
(in a tone of grave reproof) There are nails for that, Mrs Brandywine.
Mrs Brandywine is at a loss.
(Going.) You could dispense with one or the other. You don't need both. (Checking.) What are his kidneys like?
Mrs Brandywine
(as before) He never lets me see them.
Man
You could wait till he's gone out.
Mrs Brandywine
I don't like to rummage behind his back.
Man
It's in his own interests, Mrs Brandywine.
The Man goes out. Mrs Brandywine turns away, bemused, and notices the full cup of tea.
Mrs Brandywine
(calling) You haven't drunk your tea.
Man
(off) I prefer to see it in the cup. (More distant.) I'll be in touch with you, Mrs Brandywine. As soon as anything comes through.
117
Mrs Brandywine sits down. She shrugs off the episode and is herself again. All the same, she is too preoccupied to return to the album. Mr Brandywine looks up from his reading and turns his head to look at Mrs Brandywine, who has her back to him. He turns back, half turns his head and speaks without looking at her.
Mr Brandywine
(nodding sharply towards the door) Relative?
Mrs Brandywine
(returning sharply to the album as she answers with unemphatic asperity) He didn't say.
Mr Brandywine returns to his book. The scene is exactly as at the beginning. There is a tableau for less than a second.
L = Listener.
R = Reader.
As alike in appearance as possible.
Light on table midstage. Rest of stage in darkness.
Plain white deal table say 8' × 4'.
Two plain armless white deal chairs.
L seated at table facing front towards end of long side audience right. Bowed head propped on right hand. Face hidden. Left hand on table. Long black coat. Long white hair.
R seated at table in profile centre of short side audience right. Bowed head propped on right hand. Left hand on table. Book on table before him open at last pages. Long black coat. Long white hair. Black wide-brimmed hat at centre of table.
Fade up.
Ten seconds.
R turns page.
Pause.
R
(Reading.) Little is left to tell. In a last—
L knocks with left hand on table.

Little is left to tell.
Pause. Knock.

In a last attempt to obtain relief he moved from where they had been so long together to a single room on the far bank. From its single window he could see the downstream extremity of the Isle of Swans.
Pause.

Relief he had hoped would flow from unfamiliarity. Unfamiliar room. Unfamiliar scene. Out to where nothing ever shared. Back to where nothing ever shared. From
138
this he had once half hoped some measure of relief might flow.
Pause.

Day after day he could be seen slowly pacing the islet. Hour after hour. In his long black coat no matter what the weather and old world Latin Quarter hat. At the tip he would always pause to dwell on the receding stream. How in joyous eddies its two arms conflowed and flowed united on. Then turn and his slow steps retrace.
Pause.

In his dreams—
Knock.

Then turn and his slow steps retrace.
Pause. Knock.

In his dreams he had been warned against this change. Seen the dear face and heard the unspoken words, Stay where we were so long alone together, my shade will comfort you.
Pause.

Could he not—
Knock.

Seen the dear face and heard the unspoken words, Stay where we were so long alone together, my shade will comfort you.
Pause. Knock.

Could he not now turn back? Acknowledge his error and return to where they were once so long alone together. Alone together so much shared. No. What he had done alone could not be undone. Nothing he had ever done alone could ever be undone. By him alone.
Pause.

In this extremity his old terror of night laid hold on him again. After so long a lapse that as if never been. (Pause. Looks closer.) Yes, after so long a lapse that as if never been. Now with redoubled force the fearful symptoms described at length page forty paragraph four. (Starts to turn back the pages. Checked by L's left hand. Resumes 139relinquished page.) White nights now again his portion. As when his heart was young. No sleep no braving sleep till—
(Turns page.) —dawn of day.
Pause.

Little is left to tell. One night—
Knock.

Little is left to tell.
Pause. Knock.

One night as he sat trembling head in hands from head to foot a man appeared to him and said, I have been sent by—and here he named the dear name—to comfort you. Then drawing a worn volume from the pocket of his long black coat he sat and read till dawn. Then disappeared without a word.
Pause.

Some time later he appeared again at the same hour with the same volume and this time without preamble sat and read it through again the long night through. Then disappeared without a word.
Pause.

So from time to time unheralded he would appear to read the sad tale through again and the long night away. Then disappear without a word.
Pause.

With never a word exchanged they grew to be as one.
Pause.

Till the night came at last when having closed the book and dawn at hand he did not disappear but sat on without a word.
Pause.

Finally he said, I have had word from—and here he named the dear name—that I shall not come again. I saw the dear face and heard the unspoken words, No need to go to him again, even were it in your power.
Pause.
140

So the sad—
Knock.

Saw the dear face and heard the unspoken words, No need to go to him again, even were it in your power.
Pause. Knock.

So the sad tale a last time told they sat on as though turned to stone. Through the single window dawn shed no light. From the street no sound of reawakening. Or was it that buried in who knows what thoughts they paid no heed? To light of day. To sound of reawakening. What thoughts who knows. Thoughts, no, not thoughts. Profounds of mind. Buried in who knows what profounds of mind. Of mindlessness. Whither no light can reach. No sound. So sat on as though turned to stone. The sad tale a last time told.
Pause.

Nothing is left to tell.
Pause. R makes to close book. Knock. Book half closed.

Nothing is left to tell.
Pause. R closes book.
Knock.
Silence. Five seconds.
Simultaneously they lower their right hands to table, raise their heads and look at each other. Unblinking. Expressionless. Ten seconds.
Fade out.
Curtain.
Faint diffuse light.
Speaker stands well off centre downstage audience left.
White hair, white nightgown, white socks.
Two metres to his left, same level, same height, standard lamp, skull-sized white globe, faintly lit.
Just visible extreme right, same level, white foot of pallet bed.
Ten seconds before speech begins.
Thirty seconds before end of speech lamplight begins to fail.
Lamp out. Silence. Speaker, globe, foot of pallet, barely visible in diffuse light.
Ten seconds.
Front centre, touching one another, three identical grey urns (see page 66) about one yard high. From each a head protrudes, the neck held fast in the urn's mouth. The heads are those, from left to right as seen from auditorium, of W2, M and W1. They face undeviatingly front throughout the play. Faces so lost to age and aspect as to seem almost part of urns. But no masks.
Their speech is provoked by a spotlight projected on faces alone (see page 65).
The transfer of light from one face to another is immediate. No blackout, i.e. return to almost complete darkness of opening, except where indicated.
The response to light is immediate.
Faces impassive throughout. Voices toneless except where an expression is indicated.
Rapid tempo throughout.
The curtain rises on a stage in almost complete darkness. Urns just discernible. Five seconds.
Faint spots simultaneously on three faces. Three seconds.Voices faint, largely unintelligible.
W1
W2
m
Yes, strange, darkness best, and the darker the worse, till all dark,
then all well, for the time, but it will come, the time will come,
the thing is there, you'll see it, get off me, keep off me, all dark,
all still, all over, wiped out—
(Together. See pages 65–6.) Yes, perhaps, a shade gone, I suppose,
some might say, poor thing, a shade gone, just a shade, in the head—
(Faint wild laugh.) —just a shade, but I doubt it, 54I doubt it, not really,
I'm all right, still all right, do my best, all I can—
Yes, peace, one assumed, all out, all the pain, all as if… never been,
it will come—(Hiccup.) —pardon, no sense in this, oh I know… none the less,
one assumed, peace… I mean… not merely all over, but as if… never been—
Spots off. Blackout. Five seconds. Strong spots simultaneously on three faces. Three seconds.Voices normal strength.
W1
W2
m
I said to him, Give her up—
(Together.) One morning as I was sitting—
We were not long together—
Spots off. Blackout. Five seconds. Spot on W1.
W1
I said to him, Give her up. I swore by all I held most sacred—
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
One morning as I was sitting stitching by the open window she burst in and flew at me. Give him up, she screamed, he's mine. Her photographs were kind to her. Seeing her now for the first time full length in the flesh I understood why he preferred me.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
We were not long together when she smelled the rat. Give up that whore, she said, or I'll cut my throat—(Hiccup.) pardon—so help me God. I knew she could have no proof. So I told her I did not know what she was talking about.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
What are you talking about? I said, stitching away. Someone yours? Give up whom? I smell you off him, she screamed, he stinks of bitch.
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Though I had him dogged for months by a first-rate man, no shadow of proof was forthcoming. And there was no denying that he continued as… assiduous as ever. 55This, and his horror of the merely Platonic thing, made me sometimes wonder if I were not accusing him unjustly. Yes.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
What have you to complain of? I said. Have I been neglecting you? How could we be together in the way we are if there were someone else? Loving her as I did, with all my heart, I could not but feel sorry for her.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
Fearing she was about to offer me violence I rang for Erskine and had her shown out. Her parting words, as he could testify, if he is still living, and has not forgotten, coming and going on the earth, letting people in, showing people out, were to the effect that she would settle my hash. I confess this did alarm me a little, at the time.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
She was not convinced. I might have known. I smell her off you, she kept saying. There was no answer to this. So I took her in my arms and swore I could not live without her. I meant it, what is more. Yes, I am sure I did. She did not repulse me.
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Judge then of my astoundment when one fine morning, as I was sitting stricken in the morning room, he slunk in, fell on his knees before me, buried his face in my lap and… confessed.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
She put a bloodhound on me, but I had a little chat with him. He was glad of the extra money.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
Why don't you get out, I said, when he started moaning about his home life, there is obviously nothing between you any more. Or is there?
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
I confess my first feeling was one of wonderment. What a male!
56
Spot from W1 to M. He opens his mouth to speak. Spot from M to W2.
W2
Anything between us, he said, what do you take me for, a something machine? And of course with him no danger of the… spiritual thing. Then why don't you get out? I said. I sometimes wondered if he was not living with her for her money.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
The next thing was the scene between them. I can't have her crashing in here, she said, threatening to take my life. I must have looked incredulous. Ask Erskine, she said, if you don't believe me. But she threatens to take her own, I said. Not yours? she said. No, I said, hers. We had fun trying to work this out.
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Then I forgave him. To what will love not stoop! I suggested a little jaunt to celebrate, to the Riviera or our darling Grand Canary. He was looking pale. Peaked. But this was not possible just then. Professional commitments.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
She came again. Just strolled in. All honey. Licking her lips. Poor thing. I was doing my nails, by the open window. He has told me all about it, she said. Who he, I said filing away, and what it? I know what torture you must be going through, she said, and I have dropped in to say I bear you no ill-feeling. I rang for Erskine.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Then I got frightened and made a clean breast of it. She was looking more and more desperate. She had a razor in her vanity-bag. Adulterers, take warning, never admit.
Spot from M to W1.
W1
When I was satisfied it was all over I went to have a gloat. Just a common tart. What he could have found in her when he had me—
Spot from W1 to W2.
57
W2
When he came again we had it out. I felt like death. He went on about why he had to tell her. Too risky and so on. That meant he had gone back to her. Back to that!
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Pudding face, puffy, spots, blubber mouth, jowls, no neck, dugs you could—
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
He went on and on. I could hear a mower. An old hand mower. I stopped him and said that whatever I might feel I had no silly threats to offer—but not much stomach for her leavings either. He thought that over for a bit.
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Calves like a flunkey—
Spot from W1 to M.
m
When I saw her again she knew. She was looking— (Hiccup.) —wretched. Pardon. Some fool was cutting grass. A little rush, then another. The problem was how to convince her that no… revival of intimacy was involved. I couldn't. I might have known. So I took her in my arms and said I could not go on living without her. I don't believe I could have.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
The only solution was to go away together. He swore we should as soon as he had put his affairs in order. In the meantime we were to carry on as before. By that he meant as best we could.
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
So he was mine again. All mine. I was happy again. I went about singing. The world—
Spot from W1 to M.
m
At home all heart to heart, new leaf and bygones bygones. I ran into your ex-doxy, she said one night, on the pillow, you're well out of that. Rather uncalled for, I thought. I am indeed, sweetheart, I said, I am indeed. God what vermin women. Thanks to you, angel, I said.
Spot from M to W1.
58
W1
Then I began to smell her off him again. Yes.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
When he stopped coming I was prepared. More or less.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Finally it was all too much. I simply could no longer—
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Before I could do anything he disappeared.That meant she had won. That slut! I couldn't credit it. I lay stricken for weeks. Then I drove over to her place. It was all bolted and barred. All grey with frozen dew. On the way back by Ash and Snodland—
Spot from W1 to M.
m
I simply could no longer—
Spot from M to W2.
W2
I made a bundle of his things and burnt them. It was November and the bonfire was going. All night I smelt them smouldering.
Spot off W2. Blackout. Five seconds. Spots half previous strength simultaneously on three faces. Three seconds. Voices proportionately lower.
W1
W2
m
Mercy, mercy—
(Together.) To say I am—
When first this change—
Spots off. Blackout. Five seconds. Spot on M.
m
When first this change I actually thanked God. I thought, It is done, it is said, now all is going out—
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Mercy, mercy, tongue still hanging out for mercy. It will come. You haven't seen me. But you will. Then it will come.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
To say I am not disappointed, no, I am. I had anticipated something better. More restful.
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Or you will weary of me. Get off me.
Spot from W1 to M.
59
m
Down, all going down, into the dark, peace is coming, I thought, after all, at last, I was right, after all, thank God, when first this change.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
Less confused. Less confusing. At the same time I prefer this to… the other thing. Definitely. There are endurable moments.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
I thought.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
When you go out—and I go out. Some day you will tire of me and go out… for good.
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Hellish half-light.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Peace, yes, I suppose, a kind of peace, and all that pain as if… never been.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
Give me up, as a bad job. Go away and start poking and pecking at someone else. On the other hand—
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Get off me! (Vehement.) Get off me!
Spot from W1 to M.
m
It will come. Must come. There is no future in this.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
On the other hand things may disimprove, there is that danger.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Oh of course I know now—
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Is it that I do not tell the truth, is that it, that some day somehow I may tell the truth at last and then no more light at last, for the truth?
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
You might get angry and blaze me clean out of my wits. Mightn't you?
60
Spot from W2 to M.
m
I know now, all that was just… play. And all this? When will all this —
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Is that it?
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
Mightn't you?
Spot from W2 to M.
m
All this, when will all this have been… just play?
Spot from M to W1.
W1
I can do nothing… for anybody… any more… thank God. So it must be something I have to say. How the mind works still!
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
But I doubt it. It would not be like you somehow. And you must know I am doing my best. Or don't you?
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Perhaps they have become friends. Perhaps sorrow—
Spot from M to W1.
W1
But I have said all I can. All you let me. All I—
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Perhaps sorrow has brought them together.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
No doubt I make the same mistake as when it was the sun that shone, of looking for sense where possibly there is none.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Perhaps they meet, and sit, over a cup of that green tea they both so loved, without milk or sugar, not even a squeeze of lemon—
Spot from M to W2.
W2
Are you listening to me? Is anyone listening to me? Is anyone looking at me? Is anyone bothering about me at all?
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Not even a squeeze of—
61
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Is it something I should do with my face, other than utter? Weep?
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
Am I taboo, I wonder. Not necessarily, now that all danger is averted. That poor creature—I can hear her— that poor creature—
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Bite off my tongue and swallow it? Spit it out? Would that placate you? How the mind works still to be sure!
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Meet, and sit, now in the one dear old place, now in the other, and sorrow together, and compare—(Hiccup.) pardon—happy memories.
Spot from M to W1.
W1
If only I could think, There is no sense in this… either, none whatsoever. I can't.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
That poor creature who tried to seduce you, what ever became of her, do you suppose?—I can hear her. Poor thing.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Personally I always preferred Lipton's.
Spot from M to W1.
W1
And that all is falling, all fallen, from the beginning, on empty air. Nothing being asked at all. No one asking me for anything at all.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
They might even feel sorry for me, if they could see me.
But never so sorry as I for them.
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
I can't.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
Kissing their sour kisses.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
I pity them in any case, yes, compare my lot with theirs, however blessed, and—
62
Spot from M to W1.
W1
I can't.The mind won't have it. It would have to go.Yes.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Pity them.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
What do you do when you go out? Sift?
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Am I hiding something? Have I lost—
Spot from M to W1.
W1
She had means, I fancy, though she lived like a pig.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
Like dragging a great roller, on a scorching day. The strain… to get it moving, momentum coming—
Spot off W2. Blackout. Three seconds. Spot on W2.
W1
Kill it and strain again.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
Have I lost… the thing you want? Why go out? Why go—
Spot from M to W2.
W2
And you perhaps pitying me, thinking, Poor thing, she needs a rest.
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Perhaps she has taken him away to live… somewhere in the sun.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Why go down? Why not—
Spot from M to W2.
W2
I don't know.
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Perhaps she is sitting somewhere, by the open window, her hands folded in her lap, gazing down out over the olives—
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Why not keep on glaring at me without ceasing? I might start to rave and—(Hiccup.) —bring it up for you. Par—
Spot from M to W2.
W2
No.
63
Spot from W2 to M.
m
—don.
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Gazing down out over the olives, then the sea, wondering what can be keeping him, growing cold. Shadow stealing over everything. Creeping.Yes.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
To think we were never together.
Spot from M to W2.
W2
Am I not perhaps a little unhinged already?
Spot from W2 to W1.
W1
Poor creature. Poor creatures.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Never woke together, on a May morning, the first to wake to wake the other two. Then in a little dinghy—
Spot from M to W1.
W2
Penitence, yes, at a pinch, atonement, one was resigned, but no, that does not seem to be the point either.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W1
I say, Am I not perhaps a little unhinged already? (Hopefully.) Just a little? [Pause.] I doubt it.
Spot from W2 to M.
m
A little dinghy—
Spot from M to W1.
W2
Silence and darkness were all I craved.Well, I get a certain amount of both. They being one. Perhaps it is more wickedness to pray for more.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
A little dinghy, on the river, I resting on my oars, they lolling on air-pillows in the stern… sheets. Drifting.
Such fantasies.
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Hellish half-light.
Spot from W1 to W2.
W2
A shade gone. In the head. Just a shade. I doubt it.
Spot from W2 to M.
64
m
We were not civilised.
Spot from M to W1.
W1
Dying for dark—and the darker the worse. Strange.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Such fantasies. Then. And now—
Spot from M to W2.
W2
I doubt it.
Pause. Peal of wild low laughter from W2 cut short as spot from her to W1.
W1
Yes, and the whole thing there, all there, staring you in the face.You'll see it. Get off me. Or weary.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
And now, that you are… mere eye. Just looking. At my face. On and off.
Spot from M to W1.
W2
Weary of playing with me. Get off me. Yes.
Spot from W1 to M.
m
Looking for something. In my face. Some truth. In my eyes. Not even.
Spot from M to W2. Laugh as before from W2 cut short as spot from her to M.
m
Mere eye. No mind. Opening and shutting on me. Am I as much—
Spot off M. Blackout. Three seconds. Spot on M.
Am I as much as… being seen?
Spot off M. Blackout. Five seconds. Faint spots simultaneously on three faces. Three seconds. Voices faint, largely unintelligible.
W1
W2
m
Yes, strange, etc.
(Together.) Yes, perhaps, etc.
Yes, peace, etc.
Repeat play.
m
(Closing repeat.) Am I as much as… being seen?
Spot off M. Blackout. Five seconds. Strong spots simultaneously on three faces. Three seconds.Voices normal strength.
65
W1
W2
m
I said to him, Give her up—
(Together.) One morning as I was sitting—
We were not long together—
Spots off. Blackout. Five seconds. Spot on M.
m
We were not long together—
Spot off M. Blackout. Five seconds.
CURTAIN
The living room. The silence between Bro Paradock, who stands with a glass in his hand looking out of the window, and his wife, Middie Paradock, whose glass stands beside her on the small table by which she is sitting, has clearly just fallen. It is not broken for nearly half a minute.
Mrs Paradock
So don't flatter yourself.
Bro Paradock turns from the window, empties his glass and, picking up Middie Paradock's glass, goes to a side table to fill both from one of two bottles containing a brightly purple liquid.
Mr Paradock
I'm not flattering myself. And in any case we had all this out before.
Mrs Paradock
And now we're having it out again.
Bro Paradock hands one of the two glasses to his wife. Both raise their glasses perfunctorily, grunt and sip. They are far from certain what to make of the bliss they come upon for the second time, and Bro Paradock, after another two sips, takes up the bottle and looks steadily at the label.
Mr Paradock
I've never known this to happen before.
Mrs Paradock
It doesn't have to have happened before.
Mr Paradock
I can feel it hurrying through my veins like smoke.
Mrs Paradock
It's happened now. That's all you need concern yourself with.
6
Mr Paradock
My lines seem to be coming to me in bits. Or what seem to be bits. This is like some unspecified milk of paradise.
Mrs Paradock
What you can't remember you can make up.
Mr Paradock
And what I can't make up can go unsaid.
Mrs Paradock
No one minds with this kind of play. No one notices. You can be eight sheets in the wind or whatever it is practically from the word 'go' and the more the merrier from the author down. Or up. So don't for God's sake start having any qualms over remembering your lines or anybody else's lines. Just put it down to the ambrosia. Let ambrosia look after it.
Mr Paradock
Ambrosia is what they eat. Not what they drink.
Mrs Paradock
What who eat?
Mr Paradock
You mean nectar. Let the nectar look after it. Not ambrosia.
Mrs Paradock
Who said anything about nectar?
Mr Paradock
You can't drink ambrosia, for God's sake! Ambrosia is the food of the immortals. It's what the gods eat.
Mrs Paradock
I don't know what it is you're trying to prove with your slick emendations of every damn remark I make, but whatever it is you can go right ahead and prove something different.
A knock.
What the hell do you think you make me look like by comparison?
Mrs Paradock goes out to answer the knock. Bro Paradock takes up a newspaper. Middie Paradock7returns and begins tidying the room, speaking as she does so.
There's somebody at the door wanting you to form a government.
Bro Paradock looks at her in astonishment. Several seconds elapse.
Mr Paradock
What does he look like?
Mrs Paradock
He says he's working through the street directory.
Pause.
I shall want this cork opened in case we have to offer him a drink. (Pause.) He was wearing an old raincoat. He looked as if he was trying it on for size.
Mr Paradock
Give me the bottle. You can't open a cork. You should know that. You open the bottle. (He begins to remove the cork.) If it's an old raincoat what would he be trying it on for?
Mrs Paradock
It might not be as old as the one he had before.
Mr Paradock
I don't know why you wanted this bottle opened when the other one's more than half full.
Mrs Paradock
The coat he had before may have been in tatters. It may have been black with grease. Or mud.
With a preoccupied air, Bro Paradock takes a pipe from the mantelpiece and begins filling it.
Mr Paradock
How can I start forming a government at six o'clock in the evening?
Mrs Paradock
You'd be saying the same thing if it were six o'clock in the morning.
8
She takes a torn and dirty raincoat from a cupboard.
Look at this thing. How do you know his mightn't have been in a worse state than this one? Look at the sleeves. And the collar – look at it. His was probably as bad or worse.
Mr Paradock
It's the Prime Minister's job.
Mrs Paradock
Oh yes. If you want to shelve your responsibilities I dare say it is the Prime Minister's job.
Mr Paradock
It's no concern of mine at all.
Mrs Paradock
There's a man at the door waiting for your answer.
Pause.
Mr Paradock
How do you know he isn't wanted by the police?
Mrs Paradock
Why should he be?
Mr Paradock
If he is, we ought to turn him over.
Mrs Paradock
If he's a criminal, he's in plain clothes – that's all I can say.
Mr Paradock
I'm going to turn him over.
He moves to the door.
Mrs Paradock
You may never get another chance to form a government.
Mr Paradock
That goes for anything I ever choose not to do.
Mrs Paradock
So what's it to be?
Mr Paradock
I'll see what he looks like.
He goes out. Middie Paradock clears the table, sets out paper, ashtrays, water and glasses as for a board meeting.9Bro Paradock returns, takes up a newspaper and sits down in silence. Pause.
It was Uncle Ted having a joke.
Mrs Paradock
I would have recognised him.
Mr Paradock
He was disguising his voice. He said I looked like Gladstone.
Mrs Paradock
And did you?
Mr Paradock
He wanted me to be taken in – I could see that.
Mrs Paradock
So I suppose you obliged?
Mr Paradock
That sort of thing cuts no ice with me.
Mrs Paradock
You should have led him on by pretending to think it was 1868.
Mr Paradock
It was all of a piece with his asking me to form a government.
Mrs Paradock
I hope you didn't start saying: 'My mission is to pacify Ireland'?
Mr Paradock
It cut no more ice with me than Gladstone would have done if I'd been Queen Victoria. And God knows there's little enough of the Empress of India about me.
Mrs Paradock
It would have been playing into his hands to say: 'My mission is to pacify Ireland.'
Mr Paradock
I know it would have been playing into his hands.
Mrs Paradock
I can't think why I didn't recognise him.
Mr Paradock
He said he was round canvassing for the Whigs.
10
Mrs Paradock
Surely Uncle Ted knows you've never been a Whig?
Mr Paradock
I suppose he thought he could talk me round like last time, when he had me voting for some candidate who refused to stand.
Mrs Paradock
You should have let him come in for a few minutes to try your overcoat on.
Mr Paradock
My overcoat would never fit Uncle Ted. Uncle Ted is broader across the shoulders than I am.
Mrs Paradock
Exactly.
Mr Paradock
He's a bigger man altogether than I am. He'd never get into my overcoat. I doubt whether he could even wear it like a cloak.
Mrs Paradock
You don't see what I'm leading up to, do you? I know your overcoat is too small for him. It's too small for you except when you're in one of your pint-size moods. But if he'd tried it on I could have seen at a glance he wasn't a man of your build. I might after a time have been able to narrow it down to Uncle Ted. As it is, I don't know what to think.
Mr Paradock
I've already told you it was Uncle Ted having a joke with us. It's just the kind of joke Uncle Ted would think up.
Mrs Paradock
And what happened about the government? Did you agree to form one or not?
Mr Paradock
I wasn't approached.
Mrs Paradock
That's a likely story.
Mr Paradock
He probably forgot.
Mrs Paradock
If he forgot, how do you know it was Uncle Ted? It looks to me as if you've let yourself in for something with your bland assumptions about it being11Uncle Ted having a joke with us. You'll be getting somebody round before you know where you are with papers to prove it's 1868.
Mr Paradock
But not that I'm Gladstone.
Mrs Paradock
If it's 1868 it makes precious little difference whether you're Gladstone or Disraeli.
A knock.
Mr Paradock
Tell them I'm in conference.
Mrs Paradock
It'll be the concert party, I expect.
Middie Paradock goes out. Bro Paradock sits down at the head of the table as though presiding at a directors' meeting of four, whose names around the table, anticlockwise from himself, are Black, Green, White and Brown. Bro Paradock appears to be following a discussion which is passing back and forth across the table. Occasionally he intervenes to clarify a point, to invite a comment or to call someone to order. Middie Paradock returns.
I've sent them upstairs to get their make-up on. It's the concert party.
Mr Paradock
Where are they going to do their act? There's no room in here for them.
Mrs Paradock
It doesn't last more than ten minutes or so.
Mr Paradock
They've still got to have somewhere to do it.
Mrs Paradock
They can do it in the room next door. We can watch through the serving hatch there. We've done it before.
Mr Paradock
(shrugs) As long as they're satisfied. Give me a hand to get this board meeting out of the way before they come down, Middie.
12
Mrs Paradock
If I can find my shorthand.
Middie Paradock fetches a notebook and pencil, quickly tidies her hair as she passes a mirror, puts on stylishly elegant spectacles and sits down beside Bro Paradock. The mime continues for a few moments, and Bro Paradock then rises to close the meeting.
Mr Paradock
Gentlemen. We have several proposals before us. I think we have three, to be exact – unless Mr Black's last point is to be taken as expanding the total to three and a half! (He acknowledges laughter.) The question is whether by continuing the meeting for another three or four hours we can reduce those three – and a half – proposals to one, or whether it would be better to congratulate ourselves on the progress we have already made and postpone a final decision for later consideration. As you know, gentlemen, and it is a melancholy thought – whatever we may decide, whatever plans we may make for the future of the company, it is beyond any of us to predict the conditions under which those plans will have to work, since no one can forecast – and perhaps least of all the government itself – what the government's future policy towards typewriter ribbons is to be. (He acknowledges laughter) We have cleared a great deal of useful ground here this afternoon, and I think you will agree with me when I say…
First Comedian, wearing a white coat and carrying a stethoscope, enters.
Mrs Paradock
Here they are.
First Comedian
The other one's coming in a moment. Where would you like us?
Mrs Paradock
(opening the door right into an adjoining room) We thought perhaps in here would be rather nice.
13
Middie Paradock leads First Comedian out, switching on the light to reveal a small adjoining room containing a washbasin, a light, long wooden table and a desk. Bro Paradock puts his head through the hatch.
Mrs Paradock
We haven't got a stage for you, I'm afraid, but there's any amount of hot water upstairs if you want to wash the make-up off afterwards.
Mr Paradock
We thought for the moment you were Uncle Ted back.
Mrs Paradock
We thought nothing of the kind. He thinks it's 1868 and you've come to ask him to form a government. It's all he ever thinks about.
First Comedian
I'd like an old blanket on this table, Mrs Paradock, and two or three cushions if you could manage it.
Mrs Paradock
I can manage the blanket; I'll see what I can find for you to use as cushions.
First Comedian
A pillow would do. I only want to prop his head up.
Mrs Paradock
I'll find something. And say nothing to him whatever you do about Edward Cardwell. He's only waiting for a chance to have you reforming the Army. He thinks he's Gladstone.
Mr Paradock
I'm not deaf and I don't need humouring, thank you.
Mrs Paradock
Cushions and a blanket.
Middie Paradock goes out.
Mr Paradock
There's plenty of hot water in the bathroom upstairs.
First Comedian continues in silence to set his scene, placing the table near the front of the stage and14arranging papers on the desk. Middie Paradock comes in with blanket and cushions.
I was telling our friend here there's plenty of hot water upstairs if they want it afterwards.
Mrs Paradock
A spotlight would be more to the point. They can't do their act in total darkness.
Mr Paradock
It isn't what they can do that matters. Or what they can't do. It's what we can see them doing. That's the thing that matters.
First Comedian places cushions under the blanket, with which he covers the table to form an improvised couch as for a doctor's patient.
First Comedian
I think we're about ready now, if you wouldn't mind giving my friend a shout. He can come through the same door there when you've put out the light in your room.
Mrs Paradock
Do you hear that, Bro? We're to have our light out. You'd better have your torch ready.
Middie Paradock goes out and returns almost immediately.
He's just coming down. Where's your torch, Bro, before I switch out the light?
Mr Paradock
It's here ready. I've had it ready all the time while you've been talking.
Mrs Paradock
Isn't this exciting?
She switches off the light. By the light of the torch she finds her way to the hatch. First Comedian is sitting at his improvised desk, writing. He leans forward, presses a button, and says 'Ping'. The door from the living room opens to admit a man of no particular age between forty and sixty, whose nondescript appearance15and defeated air contrast with the brisk, ebullient manner the First Comedian has assumed. This is the Second Comedian. He approaches the desk and sits diffidently down. When after a few minutes the First Comedian disengages his attention from what he is writing, the Second Comedian leans forward.
Second Comedian
It's my feet, Doctor.
First Comedian
What's the matter with your feet?
Second Comedian
I was rather hoping you might be able to tell me that, Doctor.
First Comedian
Let me see them.
Second Comedian takes off shoes and socks.
Second Comedian
They're all right now. It's when they suddenly swivel round they catch me.
Second Comedian holds out both legs quite straight in front of him. First Comedian stands over them.
First Comedian
What are these?
Second Comedian
They're my kneecaps, Doctor.
First Comedian
They ought to be much higher up your legs than this.
Second Comedian
I can't seem to keep them up, Doctor.
First Comedian
Take everything off except your trousers and lie down over there.
First Comedian goes to washbasin, where he begins washing his hands, while Second Comedian goes into the corner, where the desk conceals him, to undress.
Eardrums still getting overheated?
Second Comedian
Only when I listen to anything, Doctor.
16
Second Comedian comes out and lies down on the couch. First Comedian examines his chest.
First Comedian
Breathe in deeply. Again. Yes – you're having trouble with your breathing. Breathe out. Do you notice any difference?
Second Comedian
None at all, Doctor.
First Comedian
And do you know why? The reason you notice no difference is that there isn't any. All the time while you're breathing out, there's air forcing its way in. It's trying to push past. Breathe in again. (He reflects for a moment.) Do you ever feel as though the air you're getting is the wrong kind of air?
Second Comedian
I just don't get the air, Doctor.
First Comedian
Somebody must have it if you don't.
Second Comedian
It's my lungs, Doctor.
First Comedian
Nonsense. There's nothing wrong with your lungs. They're both perfectly fit.
Second Comedian
I don't think they hit it off, Doctor. They're at daggers drawn practically the whole time. Over the air.
First Comedian
And your breathing's twisted to blazes as a result. Let me see your tongue. Open your mouth. (He looks inside) You've had this jaw to pieces, haven't you?
Second Comedian
It was some years ago, Doctor.
First Comedian
It doesn't matter how long ago it was. It's not a question of time. You laymen start dismantling these parts, but you've no idea how to put them together again. Here's a tooth which has been put back upside down. You're biting on the root.
First Comedian begins to use the stethoscope.
17
Second Comedian
I've been told I can expect all my teeth to turn turtle eventually.
First Comedian
What are you doing about it?
Second Comedian
Consulting you, Doctor.
First Comedian
I thought you'd come to me about your feet.
First Comedian grimaces as he continues to sound Second Comedian's chest.
What on earth are you carrying round in this bloodstream of yours?
Second Comedian
Only my blood, Doctor.
First Comedian
You've got a hell of a noisy circulation.
Second Comedian
I have, Doctor. It keeps me awake.
First Comedian
I should think so. It sounds like a mobile iron foundry. You need a silencer for it. I'll give you a letter to take to the King's Cross Blood, Brain and Bowel Hospital. You can have it under the National Health.
Second Comedian
I'd like them to look at my arteries while I'm there as well, Doctor. They seem to have venous blood in them.
First Comedian
It's when you get arterial blood in the veins that you need to begin worrying. Turn over and let me look at your back.
Second Comedian turns painfully over and First Comedian stands looking for some moments in silence.
Second Comedian
I've had it some time, Doctor.
First Comedian
I can see that. And we can write off these kidneys.
Second Comedian
I hardly ever use them, Doctor.
18
First Comedian
How long have your ribs been like this?
Second Comedian
As long as I can remember, Doctor.
First Comedian
And how long is that? Months? Years?
Second Comedian
I can't altogether recall, Doctor.
First Comedian goes back to his desk where he takes up a pen and begins writing briskly.
First Comedian
You can get your clothes on.
While Second Comedian gets dressed, First Comedian goes on writing. When Second Comedian reappears, he puts down his pen.
Sit down, Mr Avalanche.
Second Comedian sits down hesitantly and waits for First Comedian to begin.
I don't suppose there's much I can tell you that you don't know already. It's an obsolete body, of course, as you realise. And I'm afraid you'll have to do the best you can with it. You must learn to co-operate with your organs.
Second Comedian
The small of my back is too big, Doctor.
First Comedian
There's nothing to be gained by pretending it isn't. In fact I'll be quite frank with you, Mr Avalanche – it's a great deal larger than it should be. Not only in your case, but with a surprisingly large number of people. But there's absolutely no need for you to have any misgivings about it. People go on – some of them with far less wrong with them than you have by a long way – they go on living active lives sometimes for years. There's no reason at all, Mr Avalanche, why given time you shouldn't have a good twenty or thirty years in front of you.
19
Second Comedian
With a transparent pelvis, Doctor?
First Comedian
The main thing is to keep that blood circulating. Take precautions, but don't overdo it. Sleep whenever you can with your eyes closed. Keep off strong poisons of all kinds – and breathe. Breathe all the time. If it doesn't seem to be showing results, make sure it isn't because you're under water. Keep at it: the more you breathe the better you'll feel.
Second Comedian
I've been having a lot of trouble with my slanting bowel since I became allergic to smells, Doctor.
First Comedian
You will for a time, but it's nothing to worry about. Take this letter to the Blood, Brain and Bowel Hospital and they'll give you a thorough overhaul.
Second Comedian
I shall feel a lot easier, Doctor.
First Comedian
And get those feet seen to. They'll be no good to you while they swivel. You should be seeing somebody about them. The feet should never swivel. Hand that letter in to the almoner and you can come back here when the specialist has seen you.
Second Comedian
Thank you, Doctor. And I'll come in again, as you say, when I've been examined.
First Comedian
Next Thursday. I can't see you before then. And I'll give you something for those elbows to see if we can't get them bending the right way.
Second Comedian
Very good, Doctor.
Second Comedian goes listlessly out, switching off the light as he does so. As he enters the living room, he switches that light on. Bro and Middie Paradock withdraw from the hatch and close it. Middie Paradock half opens the door into the passage through which the Second Comedian has gone.
20
Mrs Paradock
You can find your own way upstairs, I expect. You'll find plenty of hot water up there.
She closes the door.
Mr Paradock
It's Aunt Chloe's birthday next week.
Mrs Paradock
So you keep saying.
Mr Paradock
We shall have to think of something.
Mrs Paradock
Unless we send Doris round when she comes home from school?
Mr Paradock
There's never anything she wants. If you think of anything, she's always got it. Everything you think of she's got already.
Mrs Paradock
Listen. Hear them? Hear them washing their make-up off upstairs?
Mr Paradock
What's the good of sending Doris round?
Mrs Paradock
Not if she were to burst a paper bag in Aunt Chloe's ear? We could get her a deaf aid.
Mr Paradock
I don't see why we should go to all that trouble. It isn't as if it's her twenty-first.
Mrs Paradock
I thought that was rather novel when he said: 'You've had this jaw to pieces.'
Mr Paradock
I was expecting him to make some remark about dry rot in the roof of his mouth.
Mrs Paradock
It was very unpredictable.
Mr Paradock
Except at the end. That bit about the elbows bending the wrong way. I could see that coming.
Mrs Paradock
That wasn't till right at the end.
Mr Paradock
I could see it coming.
Mrs Paradock
You mean you think you could see it coming. You're being wise after the event again. If you21could see it coming why didn't you say so before it came? That would have been the time to say it instead of waiting till it was all over.
Mr Paradock
Because if I'd said so before it came, it would have spoiled it for you.
Mrs Paradock
How did you know I hadn't seen it coming myself?
Mr Paradock
Because you'd have said so.
Mrs Paradock
And spoiled it for you?
Mr Paradock
You wouldn't have spoiled it for me because I saw it coming all along, as you well knew.
Mrs Paradock
One of these days you'll be wise after the event once too often. Did we give them supper last time?
Mr Paradock
We've never had them before.
Mrs Paradock
We would never have had them this time if it had been left to you. You'd better ask them what they want to drink when they come down.
Bro Paradock goes to the table behind the door, where he is unseen at first by the two comedians, who enter, wearing dark lounge suits, as Middie Paradock goes out.
Here they are. There'll be something ready for you in a few minutes if you'll excuse me while I get it served up.
She closes the door behind her.
First Comedian
I thought they were going to send us off without anything.
They catch sight of Bro Paradock. A difficult pause.
Mr Paradock
You'd like a drink, I expect. I'll get you some clean glasses.
22
Second Comedian opens the door and closes it behind Bro Paradock, who goes out with the tray. First Comedian shrugs, picks up a magazine, and sits with his back to the audience.
Second Comedian
You're being a bit casual, aren't you? What about all these people?
First Comedian
Well?
Second Comedian
We can't sit down and read magazines.
First Comedian
It's not my job to spoon-feed them.
Second Comedian
They'll get restive.
First Comedian
Let them talk among themselves for a time.
Second Comedian sits doubtfully down with a magazine, but is increasingly ill at ease. He gives up the effort to read and, standing up, looks across to the First Comedian. Convulsively he turns and makes an agonised attempt to address the audience direct.
Second Comedian
(inarticulate for a few moments) Good people…
He can get no further and turns angrily on First Comedian, who is now watching him with interest.
Don't just sit there!
First Comedian
(putting down his magazine) Now listen to me, Bug. Just take it easy, will you? Sit down and take that look off your face. Give it to a rabbit to wear when it meets a stoat. You look like death.
Miserably, Second Comedian sits down.
Second Comedian
Maybe it isn't your job to spoon-feed them. But it's not mine either.
23
First Comedian
Then we can both stop worrying. If they don't want to amuse themselves they can make do with silence.
Second Comedian
They'll never stand for it.
First Comedian
We can break it up with dialogue from time to time if it would make you any easier. And silence isn't so easy to come by as all that, either, if it comes to that.
Second Comedian
It's not what you go to a theatre for. You go to other places for silence. Not a theatre. They'll feel cheated.
First Comedian
It's possible. I've known people feel cheated about some odd things. I've known people buy a bath sponge and do calculations to show that two-thirds of the sponge is made up of holes. And it galls them to think that two-thirds of what they've paid good money for isn't really there. Of course they feel cheated. They have every right to feel cheated. They've been overcharged. They've been overcharged two hundred per cent.
Second Comedian
Not with a sponge. They've no right to feel cheated over a sponge. A sponge is where you expect to find holes. But a theatre is not where you expect to find silence. That's the difference. The holes are there for a purpose in a sponge. They're there to soak up the water.
First Comedian
Now you're bringing a new element into it. Start talking about purpose and you'll have the whole argument bedevilled. Before we know where we are, we shall be splitting hairs. No. Leave purpose out of it. They're not there to soak up the water. The holes in a sponge soak up the water. It's not the same.
Second Comedian
Which is what I said in the first place. The holes are there for a purpose.
24
First Comedian
Purpose, purpose, purpose! It isn't purpose – it's coincidence! They happen to be there and they happen to soak up the water. The holes were there long before you or anybody else ever used a sponge in a bath. And that goes for everything else. It goes for sponges and it goes for… for everything else. What, for instance, is the purpose of the sea? Is it so that sponges can have somewhere to grow? To give fish somewhere to use their gills? Perhaps you want to tell me that oceans exist to cater for submarines? Rather than waste all those submarines on dry land, God in His all-seeing wisdom made the sea. That's how you're arguing. You're arguing from effect back to cause and it's disastrous.
Second Comedian
You're going too fast for me. Your mind doesn't work the way mine does. Let me come to it in my own way.
First Comedian
Good God, we're going to be at it all night. Surely you can see the analogy with a sponge. We don't have to run a bath for you and let you get into it, do we? With your ducks and your boats, before you can see a simple analogy?
Second Comedian
Offensive swine!
First Comedian
All I'm trying to say is that anyone who starts with the idea of sponge, and starts squeezing water over himself out of it before he lets his mind wander slowly back through the millennia to the beginnings of things, is going the wrong way about it. He'll end up in a paroxysm of wonder. He'll want to start worshipping something, on the spot, while he's still dripping with water and his glasses are steamed up. And for no better reason, for no more compelling reason, than that the entire evolutionary processes of the cosmos seem to him to have been geared for several million years to the task of providing him with something to wash himself with.25How marvellous are Thy ways, O Lord! The seasons always working out just right for the crops; the flowers never forgetting what colour they have to be to attract the right kind of insect and repel the wrong kind, blessed be God! Isn't it wonderful the way it all works out? And if it had worked out quite differently that would have been pretty wonderful too.
Second Comedian
What none of this alters, or even begins to make any impression on as far as I can see, is the irrefutable fact that five minutes of dead silence, or even two or three minutes of it, is going to open the floodgates of their indignation like the bottom coming out of a bag of cement. They won't stomach it.
First Comedian
At the end of three or four minutes of silence, if it would put your mind at rest, we could have a hunting horn.
Second Comedian
Where would that get any of us?
First Comedian
Or a horse whinnying. To break the tension. Kettledrums. Anything like that.
Second Comedian
Bringing a neighing horse onto the stage is going to present us with more problems than it solves.
First Comedian
A whinnying horse. I said nothing about a neighing horse.
Second Comedian
People won't stand for it.
First Comedian
As for problems, of course a horse on the stage presents problems. Of course it does. And suppose we solve all the problems it presents? What happens? We end up with more problems than we started with. Because that's the way problems propagate their species. A problem left to itself dries up or goes rotten. But fertilise a problem with a solution – you'll hatch out dozens. It's better than breeding budgerigars. There isn't26anything very challenging about a budgerigar. There's a limit to what you can do by way of experiment. Horse-breeding and dog-breeding and all the other hobbies people have to occupy them when they're not breeding problems are not for you and me. The people who count are the ones who devote their lives to a search for the sterile solution from which no further problems can be bred. I hope they never find it. The moment they do, the world ends.
Second Comedian
Don't let my presence on the stage cramp your style. Go on as if I weren't here. Make a full-blooded soliloquy of it while you're in voice. Open the hatches and disgorge. Give us all plenty to flounder in and damned be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!' Only count me out.
As Second Comedian makes to fling open the door, Middie Paradock enters, carrying a tray of food.
Mrs Paradock
Oh.
She pauses uncertainly, and then goes to the table to put down the tray.
I hope I haven't interrupted you both in the middle of a quarrel.
Bro Paradock enters with a tray of drinks, which he puts down on the small table behind the door.
Mr Paradock
You'd like an aperient I expect.
Mrs Paradock
Put it down and leave it. They can pour their own in a moment.
Mr Paradock
Oh.
Middie Paradock takes Bro Paradock aside.
Mrs Paradock
We've come in at the wrong moment. They were about to have a set-to.
27
They go towards the door.
Mr Paradock
Is there anything you need? Or can you manage?
Mrs Paradock
Of course they don't need anything. There are knives in the drawer if they want to go at each other in that way.
Bro and Middie Paradock go out and close the door. Second Comedian goes to the small table, where he pours out two glasses of the purple drink and brings them to the larger table on which First Comedian has set out the food. They sit and begin their meal, eating and drinking for some time in silence.
Second Comedian
(holding up his glass) This is like the milk of paradise.
They continue to eat in silence.
It'll save time if we test for humour now.
First Comedian
Afterwards.
Second Comedian
Where I get baffled is over isolating the quintessential comic element.
Pause.
You could get rid of the linguistic overtones by using Esperanto, but that means evening classes for comedian and audience alike while they're all learning Esperanto.
First Comedian
They might not like the joke any more in Esperanto than they did in English.
Second Comedian
And after months of part-time study they'd be in a pretty ugly mood.
First Comedian
It's the wrong approach altogether. If you want to isolate the quintessential comic element, the only way you can do it is through your laughter response index.
28
Second Comedian
You mean through my own, personal laughter response index? Because if so there's nothing doing there. Every joke I've ever thought of has been tried out on myself first.
First Comedian
And what's your laughter response index?
Second Comedian
I get a nil reading. I've got no sense of humour.
First Comedian
I doubt that. You may have a low laughter quotient. Many people have. But it's ridiculous for a comedian to be without a sense of humour altogether.
Second Comedian
I keep it under control. I like to keep my satiric vision unimpaired.
First Comedian
Satiric vision my sunglasses! You've got about as much satiric vision as a hawk with bifocals has got eyes like a lynx. Or vice versa, as far as that goes. You remind me of a lark walking the plank with its eyes closed. Slowly. Cautiously. Feeling its way step by step, making a false move and clutching convulsively at the air before hitting the water.
They continue the meal in silence.
You remind me of a pigeon coming down by parachute.
Silence.
Coming down by parachute because it likes to keep its neuroses airborne as long as possible.
Second Comedian
You're as smug as a parrot.
First Comedian
You remind me of a cormorant.
Second Comedian
As smug as a parrot from the Azores. I only hope when you hit the water you don't find it frozen over. Or that if you do you're wearing your skates. If you're wearing your skates when you hit the water and29find it frozen over, you can be as smug as you like till kingdom come and I wish you joy of it. Till then, leave it to the parrots, please.
First Comedian
You remind me of a cormorant with a beak a yard long tapping out a manifesto to the cosmos on a second-hand typewriter. I affirm letter by tipsy letter that I exist! I am in revolt (with reservations) against revolt! I do not choose not to be! Beak first, it plunges like a kingfisher into the glutinous mud, sticks fast and quivers like a tuning fork.
They eat the rest of their meal in silence and then, pushing back their chairs, get up from the table.
I wonder what kind of an allegory they'll make of that.
Second Comedian
We shall know soon enough.
They move in an unsettled way about the room, picking up and putting down books and ornaments, looking out of the window, yawning.
First Comedian
I suggest we have one more drink and then see what we can do on the strength of it by way of getting the curtain down.
He pours two drinks, one of which he hands to Second Comedian.
Go for spontaneity. Just give the dialogue its head – it's bound to be almost played out by now.
Second Comedian
This seems a damned hit-or-miss way to me of doing things.
First Comedian
It won't when you've had some more nectar. Drink up. A sort of rallentando close should do it very nicely, but don't try to force it. Let it take its course.
First Comedian takes up a position at the window.
The stars are a long way off tonight.
30
Second Comedian joins him for a moment at the window, looks up as though to verify First Comedian's observation and then turns away.
Second Comedian
The planets are not much nearer.
Second Comedian stands looking intently at a goldfish in a bowl. First Comedian comes away from the window.
First Comedian
In 1751 Dr Joseph Priestley was distressed that he could not feel a proper repentance for the sin of Adam.
Second Comedian continues to stare into the goldfish bowl. First Comedian has something on his mind which he is uncertain how best to put into words. He takes up a position behind a high-backed chair as though in front of a rostrum.
Second Comedian
The open sea is a closed book to this goldfish.
Pause. Second Comedian turns away from the goldfish.
First Comedian
I concede that the earth could be flat. But I doubt it. I doubt it for a number of reasons which I don't intend to go into now. I'd like to put it to the test. I'd very much like to put the whole theory to the test simply by sailing west as far as I could go. If my reckoning is reliable, and if the earth is, as I believe, spherical, I ought eventually, unless there happens to be other land in the way, to arrive on the coast of China.
Second Comedian
It's a persuasive theory.
First Comedian
It opens up so many possibilities. Take the sun. We talk about sunrise and sunset. How do we know that what we imagine to be the sun rising and the sun setting, and what we imagine to be the sun moving from east to west across the sky, aren't all in fact a simple31optical illusion? How do we know that it isn't we who are moving, while the sun remains motionless in the heavens?
Second Comedian
I suppose anything could be an optical illusion.
First Comedian
Look at it this way. This is very tentative, but you've been in a train often enough, haven't you, when another train is drawn up alongside it. Now. One train begins to move. You can feel nothing, but you look through the window and decide that it's the other train which is moving backwards. As you gather speed, however, the movement of your own train as it begins to sway tells you that in fact it is you who are moving forwards.
Second Comedian
I think some of this has been gone into before.
First Comedian
You'd get exactly the same effect as you got with the trains if the earth were to be spinning in the opposite direction to the apparent movement of the sun across the sky.
Second Comedian
In fact there are a good many people who seem to organise their lives on some such assumption.
First Comedian
I don't intend to let this rest here. If Columbus was right on this score, he was very likely right on other things too. But no one will ever know what those other things were until someone takes the trouble to find out. And people aren't going to go to the trouble of finding out until he's been proved right on this point first. That's why it's up to me to vindicate him if I can. I'm certain he was right.
Second Comedian
He bides his time who's stuck knee-deep in lime.
First Comedian
I can't see what that's got to do with it.
32
Second Comedian
It's a proverb.
First Comedian
You seem to set precious little store by relevance, I must say.
Second Comedian
I prefer to go off at a tangent.
First Comedian
And damned smug you sound about it, too!
Second Comedian
I stand for the line of least resistance.
First Comedian
Then let's both doze off.
They sit opposite each other and close their eyes. Both begin muttering under their breath. At last First Comedian opens his eyes suspiciously. Suspicion turns to anger, and, leaping up, he gestures violently to where Second Comedian is sitting bolt upright and with eyes now open.
You cavalier bastard! You've been talking in my sleep!
Second Comedian
How was I to know whose sleep it was?
First Comedian
You could have asked, couldn't you?
Second Comedian
What the hell!
First Comedian
It was a pretty cavalier thing to do, that's all I'm saying. You might ask next time.
Both subside. There is a pause. Second Comedian gets up from his chair.
Second Comedian
Not a year passes but I am older.
Pause.
First Comedian
By how much I grow older, by so much am I nearer my end.
Pause.
Second Comedian
When the end comes there is no more.
33
Both look up at the curtain, which begins to fall very slowly. They follow it down a short way with their eyes, turn to look at each other in mutual search for confirmation, find it and rush to pour themselves another drink. They drink to success as the curtain comes quickly down.
Curtain.
Speaker
Birth was the death of him. Again. Words are few. Dying too. Birth was the death of him. Ghastly grinning ever since. Up at the lid to come. In cradle and crib. At suck first fiasco. With the first totters. From mammy to nanny and back. All the way. Bandied back and forth. So ghastly grinning on. From funeral to funeral. To now. This night. Two and a half billion seconds. Again. Two and a half billion seconds. Hard to believe so few. From funeral to funeral. Funerals of… he all but said of loved ones. Thirty thousand nights. Hard to believe so few. Born dead of night. Sun long sunk behind the larches. New needles turning green. In the room dark gaining. Till faint light from standard lamp. Wick turned low. And now. This night. Up at nightfall. Every nightfall. Faint light in room. Whence unknown. None from window. No. Next to none. No such thing as none. Gropes to window and stares out. 118Stands there staring out. Stock still staring out. Nothing stirring in that black vast. Gropes back in the end to where the lamp is standing. Was standing. When last went out. Loose matches in right-hand pocket. Strikes one on his buttock the way his father taught him. Takes off milkwhite globe and sets it down. Match goes out. Strikes a second as before. Takes off chimney. Smoke-clouded. Holds it in left hand. Match goes out. Strikes a third as before and sets it to wick. Puts back chimney. Match goes out. Puts back globe. Turns wick low. Backs away to edge of light and turns to face east. Blank wall. So nightly. Up. Socks. Nightgown. Window. Lamp. Backs away to edge of light and stands facing blank wall. Covered with pictures once. Pictures of… he all but said of loved ones. Unframed. Unglazed. Pinned to wall with drawing-pins. All shapes and sizes. Down one after another. Gone. Torn to shreds and scattered. Strewn all over the floor. Not at one sweep. No sudden fit of… no word. Ripped from the wall and torn to shreds one by one. Over the years.Years of nights. Nothing on the wall now but the pins. Not all. Some out with the wrench. Some still pinning a shred. So stands there facing blank wall. Dying on. No more no less. No. Less. Less to die. Ever less. Like light at nightfall. Stands there facing east. Blank pinpocked surface once white in shadow. Could once name them all. There was father. That grey void. There mother. That other. There together. Smiling. Wedding day. There all three. That grey blot. There alone. He alone. So on. Not now. Forgotten. All gone so long. Gone. Ripped off and torn to shreds. Scattered all over the floor. Swept out of the way under the bed and left. Thousand shreds under the bed with the dust and spiders. All the… he all but said the loved ones. Stands there facing the wall staring beyond. Nothing there either. Nothing stirring there either. Nothing stirring anywhere. Nothing to be seen anywhere. Nothing to be heard anywhere. Room once full of sounds. Faint sounds. 119Whence unknown. Fewer and fainter as time wore on. Nights wore on. None now. No. No such thing as none. Rain some nights still slant against the panes. Or dropping gentle on the place beneath. Even now. Lamp smoking though wick turned low. Strange. Faint smoke issuing through vent in globe. Low ceiling stained by night after night of this. Dark shapeless blot on surface elsewhere white. Once white. Stands facing wall after the various motions described. That is up at nightfall and into gown and socks. No. In them already. In them all night. All day. All day and night. Up at nightfall in gown and socks and after a moment to get his bearings gropes to window. Faint light in room. Unutterably faint. Whence unknown. Stands stock still staring out. Into black vast. Nothing there. Nothing stirring. That he can see. Hear. Dwells thus as if unable to move again. Or no will left to move again. Not enough will left to move again. Turns in the end and gropes to where he knows the lamp is standing. Thinks he knows. Was last standing. When last went out. Match one as described for globe. Two for chimney. Three for wick. Chimney and globe back on. Turns wick low. Backs away to edge of light and turns to face wall. East. Still as the lamp by his side. Gown and socks white to take faint light. Once white. Hair white to take faint light. Foot of pallet just visible edge of frame. Once white to take faint light. Stands there staring beyond. Nothing. Empty dark. Till first word always the same. Night after night the same. Birth. Then slow fade up of a faint form. Out of the dark. A window. Looking west. Sun long sunk behind the larches. Light dying. Soon none left to die. No. No such thing as no light. Starless moonless heaven. Dies on to dawn and never dies. There in the dark that window. Night slowly falling. Eyes to the small pane gaze at that first night. Turn from it in the end to face the darkened room. There in the end slowly a faint hand. Holding aloft a lighted spill. In the light of spill faintly the hand and 120milkwhite globe. Then second hand. In light of spill. Takes off globe and disappears. Reappears empty. Takes off chimney. Two hands and chimney in light of spill. Spill to wick. Chimney back on. Hand with spill disappears. Second hand disappears. Chimney alone in gloom. Hand reappears with globe. Globe back on. Turns wick low. Disappears. Pale globe alone in gloom. Glimmer of brass bedrail. Fade. Birth the death of him. That nevoid smile. Thirty thousand nights. Stands at edge of lamplight staring beyond. Into dark whole again. Window gone. Hands gone. Light gone. Gone. Again and again. Again and again gone. Till dark slowly parts again. Grey light. Rain pelting. Umbrellas round a grave. Seen from above. Streaming black canopies. Black ditch beneath. Rain bubbling in the black mud. Empty for the moment. That place beneath. Which… he all but said which loved one? Thirty seconds. To add to the two and a half billion odd. Then fade. Dark whole again. Blest dark. No. No such thing as whole. Stands staring beyond half hearing what he's saying. He? The words falling from his mouth. Making do with his mouth. Lights lamp as described. Backs away to edge of light and turns to face wall. Stares beyond into dark. Waits for first word always the same. It gathers in his mouth. Parts lips and thrusts tongue forward. Birth. Parts the dark. Slowly the window. That first night. The room. The spill. The hands. The lamp. The gleam of brass. Fade. Gone. Again and again. Again and again gone. Mouth agape. A cry. Stifled by nasal. Dark parts. Grey light. Rain pelting. Streaming umbrellas. Ditch. Bubbling black mud. Coffin out of frame. Whose? Fade. Gone. Move on to other matters. Try to move on. To other matters. How far from wall? Head almost touching. As at window. Eyes glued to pane staring out. Nothing stirring. Black vast. Stands there stock still staring out as if unable to move again. Or gone the will to move again. Gone. Faint cry in his ear. Mouth agape. 121Closed with hiss of breath. Lips joined. Feel soft touch of lip on lip. Lip lipping lip. Then parted by cry as before. Where is he now? Back at window staring out. Eyes glued to pane. As if looking his last. Turns away at last and gropes through faint unaccountable light to unseen lamp. White gown moving through that gloom. Once white. Lights and moves to face wall as described. Head almost touching. Stands there staring beyond waiting for first word. It gathers in his mouth. Birth. Parts lips and thrusts tongue between them. Tip of tongue. Feel soft touch of tongue on lips. Of lips on tongue. Fade up in outer dark of window. Stare beyond through rift in dark to other dark. Further dark. Sun long sunk behind the larches. Nothing stirring. Nothing faintly stirring. Stock still eyes glued to pane. As if looking his last. At that first night. Of thirty thousand odd. Turn away in the end to darkened room. Where soon to be. This night to be. Spill. Hands. Lamp. Gleam of brass. Pale globe alone in gloom. Brass bedrail catching light. Thirty seconds. To swell the two and a half billion odd. Fade. Gone. Cry. Snufed with breath of nostrils. Again and again. Again and again gone. Till whose grave? Which… he all but said which loved one's? He? Black ditch in pelting rain. Way out through the grey rift in dark. Seen from on high. Streaming canopies. Bubbling black mud. Coffin on its way. Loved one… he all but said loved one on his way. Her way. Thirty seconds. Fade. Gone. Stands there staring beyond. Into dark whole again. No. No such thing as whole. Head almost touching wall. White hair catching light. White gown. White socks. White foot of pallet edge of frame stage left. Once white. Least… give and head rests on wall. But no. Stock still head haught staring beyond. Nothing stirring. Faintly stirring. Thirty thousand nights of ghosts beyond. Beyond that black beyond. Ghost light. Ghost nights. Ghost rooms. Ghost graves. Ghost… he all but said ghost loved ones. Waiting on the rip word. Stands 122there staring beyond at that black veil lips quivering to half-heard words. Treating of other matters. Trying to treat of other matters. Till half hears there are no other matters. Never were other matters. Never two matters. Never but the one matter. The dead and gone. The dying and the going. From the word go. The word begone. Such as
 the light going now. Beginning to go. In the room. Where else? Unnoticed by him staring beyond.
 The globe alone. Not the other. The unaccountable. From nowhere. On all sides nowhere. Unutterably faint. The globe alone. Alone gone.
Act 1, Scene 2
In front of the curtain appears a man of perhaps thirty-five, well dressed and easy mannered; he would pass for a third-generation estate agent with an office in Knightsbridge. He represents the Author. He has a glass in his hand, which is half full of a bright, purple liquid.
Author
I agree. A pretty epileptic start. We're going to see what we can do in the next scene about pulling the thing together. Because this isn't at all of course how I wrote the play. You must have realised that. We're all – what shall I say? – we're all just a thought oiled over on this side of the footlights. I expect you've gathered that. And of course the thing was by no means as straightforward as I could have wished even before this crate arrived backstage. It really is remarkable stuff, I might say. Milk of paradise is… well, it's not what I would have called it, but I can see the connection; anyone casting around for some phrase to just hit it off with, might well seize on one like that. And of course one is quite possibly not as clear-headed after two or three glasses of this as to be able to explain altogether clearly what it is one is trying to do. Conversely, as it were, such an explanation would hardly have been needed had one not failed – rather lamentably, I must admit – to achieve what one was trying to achieve. How close we're getting to the original tonight is anybody's guess – it would have been anybody's guess whether this nectar had arrived so34unexpectedly or not. Because I know hardly a word of Portuguese, and of course Portuguese is precisely the language, unfortunately, in which the play – or most of it – came to me. I was pretty much in the dark, I can tell you, until I got to work with a dictionary. I had someone help me, naturally, and between us we've hammered out something, but I'm far from happy about the whole thing. I think what you'd all better do is to visualise if you can a regimental sergeant-major on a kitchen chair in the middle of a bare stage with his back to you. He has a megaphone through which quite suddenly he'll begin reciting Jabber-wocky over and over again for three hours at top speed. I want that image to be clear in your minds, and I want you to hold it there throughout this performance of ours tonight. It is our sheet anchor. Without that image in our minds we shall lose all sense of proportion about what we're going through here and now. For let us make no mistake about it, we are in this together and we must do what we can to see that no one of us suffers more than another. There is no desire, no intention on my part, or on the part of any of us on this side of the footlights, to impose upon you any ready-made idea of our own as to what this play ought to turn out to be. So often the author – we have all known him – moves invisibly among his audience nudging one and distracting another, muttering and mouthing among his betters. Or he leans forward from time to time to make simultaneous overtures of sumptuous impropriety to every Aunt Edna in the house. Such has never been my conception of the relationship that should exist between us. No. It is together that we must shape the experience which is the play we shall all of us have shared. The actors are as much the audience as the audience themselves, in precisely the same way that the audience are as much the actors as the actors themselves. We are all spectators of one another, mutual witnesses of each other's discomfiture. Each of us as he35receives his private trouncings at the hands of fate is kept in good heart by the moth in his brother's parachute, and the scorpion in his neighbour's underwear. So let us in the name of that Schadenfreude that binds us each to each work from now on together, you on your side of the footlights, and we on ours. We shall need all you can give us. Dramatic situations, plot, glamour, spectacle, lyricism. And some tragic relief. And if we could possibly step up the intellectual content at all? Some of you these days are travelling in from places as far out as Harrow and Morden, and you just have to have your minds stimulated more than in the days when the illusion of thought had to last no farther than Hammersmith or Putney. So there it is. I'll go off now into the wings. We'll leave the stage quite empty for a moment or two, and I think that if, like Quakers, we all compose our minds in a kind of mystic amalgam, something may come of it.
He goes off as the curtain rises on the living room as it was at the end of the first scene. The two comedians are sprawled, fast asleep, in armchairs. Bro and Middie Paradock have just come in.
Mrs Paradock
I'm not saying it's your fault.
Mr Paradock
Not a drain.
Mrs Paradock
I'm not saying it's your fault. All I'm saying is that to give them two bottles, both practically full, is hardly the best way to go about things if you want to conserve your nectar.
Mr Paradock
They might have shown a bit more restraint than to swallow the lot. They call themselves comedians. I'd like to know what's supposed to be comic about drinking to excess.
Mrs Paradock
They haven't got to be comic the whole time.
36
Mr Paradock
I wouldn't employ them to sell typewriter ribbons.
Mrs Paradock
Neither would anybody else while they were in that state.
Mr Paradock
It doesn't take you long to leap to their defence, I notice. I wonder if you'd find it so comic if I started drinking to excess.
Mrs Paradock
You've never done anything to excess in your life. That's just your trouble.
Mr Paradock
I happen to prefer moderation.
Mrs Paradock
You make a vice of it. You never know when not to stop.
Mr Paradock
I wouldn't employ them to sell typewriter ribbons for me.
Mrs Paradock
So you keep saying.
Mr Paradock
No more would I.
Mrs Paradock
And while you're not employing them selling typewriter ribbons other people are stealing a march on you in some other trade.
Mr Paradock
Comedians! I'd like to know what's comic about them now. Look at them. It isn't as if they're lying where anyone could trip over them and fall flat on his face. That might raise a laugh if it were someone else; but who's going to fall over them there?
Mrs Paradock
They'll come round presently.
Mr Paradock
All I can say is that I hope you're right.
Mrs Paradock
I wish that were all you could say. Except that you'd go on saying it all day long like a mentally deficient parakeet.
37
Mr Paradock
A parakeet wouldn't necessarily have to be mentally deficient to keep saying the same thing over and over again. If that's all it's been taught, how can it say anything else? There's nothing mentally deficient about a parakeet acting according to its nature. It may be educationally subnormal, but that's another matter.
Mrs Paradock
And when these two come round, which is more to the point, they're going to want some help in making us laugh. You'd better get down Bergson.
Mr Paradock
They may hit us over the head with it when they come round.
He goes to the bookshelf.
Mrs Paradock
It isn't very heavy. It's only a small book. I can see it from here – on the shelf. Not that one – that's right – now to the left, next to the blue one.
Mr Paradock
(taking down the book) Laughter. Henri Bergson.
Mrs Paradock
It's not big enough to do any damage even if they do hit you over the head with it. Now turn to page thirty-two and read out what it says.
Mr Paradock
(reads) 'The fundamental law of life…' (Gestures to the audience.) Will they want to take notes?
Mrs Paradock
They can read it for themselves when they get home.
Mr Paradock
Oh. (Reads.) 'The fundamental law of life… is a complete negation of repetition! But I find that a certain movement of head or arm, a movement always the same, seems to return at regular intervals. If I notice it and it succeeds in diverting my attention, if I wait for it to occur and it occurs when I expect it, then involuntarily I laugh. Why? Because I now have before me a machine that works automatically. This is no longer38life, it is automatism established in life and imitating it. It belongs to the comic.'
Mrs Paradock
Good. And what does he say on page fifty-eight?
Mr Paradock
He says, 'We laugh every time a person gives us the impression of being a thing.' You've marked it. But where does all this get us?
Mrs Paradock
You'll see. These two are Bergson-trained.
Mr Paradock
They'll be like that for hours yet.
The two comedians begin to stir.
Mrs Paradock
Will they?
The two comedians look around them as though coming out of a trance. Second Comedian leaves his chair and advances to the front of the stage. First Comedian follows.
Second Comedian
You could call this intellectual slapstick.
First Comedian
We are, metaphysically, the Marx Brothers.
Second Comedian
Presenting the custard-pie comedy of the abstract.
First Comedian
Quintessentially.
Second Comedian
And working to a blueprint.
First Comedian
The fundamental law of life is a complete negation of repetition! But I find that a certain movement of head or arm, a movement always the same, seems to return at regular intervals.
As he begins to recognise these words, Bro Paradock looks with some astonishment towards his wife, who39with a complacent half-smile sits down in one of the vacated armchairs and takes up some knitting.
If I notice it and it succeeds in diverting my attention, if I wait for it to occur and it occurs when I expect it, then involuntarily I laugh. Why? Because I now have before me a machine that works automatically. This is no longer life, it is automatism established in life and imitating it. It belongs to the comic.
Second Comedian
We laugh every time a person gives the impression of being a thing.
Bro Paradock comes forward to join them. The two comedians adopt stage American accents.
Mr Paradock
Tell me something about this Bergson method.
First Comedian
You've never seen Bergson?
Mr Paradock
Not that I can remember.
First Comedian
He's never seen Bergson.
Second Comedian
I thought everybody had seen Bergson some time or another.
First Comedian
You can't put it into words. You've just got to see it.
Mr Paradock
I understand he does it all by machinery.
Second Comedian
He just comes on. That's all. He comes on like he's a machine.
Mrs Paradock
(without looking up from her knitting) It sounds richly comic.
Second Comedian
Remember that time he came on, the way he was an electronic computer, and then had them put straw in his hair?
40
Mr Paradock
Can he do anything else? Can he do typewriters?
First Comedian
He never has. What about it, Bug? Can Bergson do a typewriter?
Mrs Paradock
He only wants to start selling you typewriter ribbons. It's a new sideline. Take no notice.
Second Comedian
Typewriters don't make out too good comedy-wise, I guess.
Mr Paradock
I want to be made up to look like an electronic computer. I want to raise a laugh.
First Comedian
It's no good looking like an electronic computer. You've got to be an electronic computer.
Mr Paradock
If Bergson can be an electronic computer for the laughs, so can I. What does an electronic computer do?
First Comedian
Electronic computer? It's… well, it's electronic. What would you say was the difference, Bug?
Second Comedian
What difference?
First Comedian
It's like the human brain except it's electronic.
Second Comedian
It's just the way they do things. They do it different. Why can't you stop asking questions?
First Comedian
It thinks. Does calculations. Almost any calculation you like to think of as long as you feed the data into it first.
Mr Paradock
Why don't we do calculations?
Second Comedian
Hell.
Mr Paradock
For the laughs. Multiply. Subtract. Like an adding machine.
41
First Comedian
But there are three of us.
Mr Paradock
A comptometer then. What does it matter? Tell me to do something. Go on. Feed me some data.
First Comedian
What sort of data?
Mr Paradock
Any sort. Just feed me. Tell me to add a hundred and ninety-three to six hundred and thirty-eight. Any damn thing.
Second Comedian
For crying out loud, a comptometer's got rows of black keys all over the top of it, for crissake, with numbers on!
Mr Paradock
Eight hundred and thirty-one!
Second Comedian
They gotta be pressed down!
Mr Paradock
That's the operator's job. Feed me some data.
First Comedian
And where's your lever mechanism?
Mr Paradock
Did Bergson say anything about a lever mechanism? The cube root of fifty thousand, six hundred and fifty-three…
First Comedian
(to Second Comedian) Unless he's electrically operated?
Second Comedian
It'd be more kinda realistic to have him bending forward like he was the right shape for a comptometer.
Mr Paradock
Thirty-seven!
First Comedian
I want him plugged in somewhere.
Mr Paradock
Three hundred and ninety-six thousand gallons of petrol at three and ninepence three-farthings a gallon allowing two per cent wastage…
42
First Comedian passes his hands over Bro Paradock in search of something, finds what he wants in his left pocket and, putting his hand into the pocket, brings out a three-pin plug attached to a length of flex. This pays itself out from Bro Paradock's pocket.
Second Comedian
Bend him forward.
First Comedian
Like this?
Second Comedian
He ought to look more like he's got keys.
Mr Paradock
Seventy-five thousand five hundred and ninety-four pounds fifteen shillings!
Second Comedian
Get him plugged in. For God's sake get him plugged in.
Mr Paradock
Feed me some data.
First Comedian
Play that flex out, Bug, will you? I'll plug him in to the power point.
Mr Paradock
Five times the cube root of pi r squared! Give me a value for 'r'. In centimetres. Furlongs. Cubits. Any damn thing.
First Comedian fits plug into socket.
Second Comedian
Switch it on.
First Comedian
Oh. (He does so.) There. Now he's live.
Bro Paradock twitches and becomes tense. His face begins to work. Suddenly words burst out in a rapid torrent.
Mr Paradock
Paraparaparallelogrammatical. Eighteen men on a dead man's chest at compound interest is not what it's for for four in the morning when the square on the hypotenuse is worth two in the circle two in the circle two in the circle two in the circle…
43
First Comedian
(looks across, alarmed, at Second Comedian) He's shorting!
Second Comedian
The voltage wants fixing.
Bro Paradock continues his monologue while First Comedian hurries to wrench out the plug.
Mr Paradock
Two in the circle two in the circle two in the circle two in the circle (Plug comes out.) two in the circle (More calmly and increasingly slowly.) at seven and six, and six and five, and five and four, and four and three, and three and two in the circle at six and five, and five and four, and four and three, and three and two in the circle at five and four, and four and three, and three and two in the circle at four and three, and three and two in the circle at three and two, and one, and nought.
Bro Paradock unbends and mops his brow.
I thought I was never going to get back. Who unplugged me?
Second Comedian
You were shorting.
Mr Paradock
You were pressing the wrong buttons. You can't do all that about pi r squared and compound interest on a comptometer. That's not what it's for. Of course I was shorting.
First Comedian
You went haywire.
Mr Paradock
I'm not surprised.
Mrs Paradock
(getting up) I expect you'd all like some coffee after that.
Second Comedian
Thank you, Mrs Paradock. We would.
Mrs Paradock
You and Hamster will want it black, I expect, after your drunken orgy.
44
First Comedian
Yes, please, Mrs Paradock. I think we finished up both those two bottles your husband opened for us.
Second Comedian
I feel terrible.
Mrs Paradock
I shan't be long. You'll feel better for a cup of coffee.
Middie Paradock goes out. Bro Paradock and the two comedians dispose themselves about the room as the lights fade out. A spotlight reveals a Technician in a white coat on, right. The living room remains in darkness while the Technician comes forward and addresses the audience.
Technician
I don't want to hold up the action for more than a minute or two, and in fact I have no intention of holding it up for as long as that. What we are doing here on the technical side is rather new and I have been asked to come out here on the stage and as quickly as I can without holding up the action longer than absolutely necessary to give you in a few words if I can just what it is we are trying to do on the technical side. You are not going to be approached in any way. Please be quite at ease on that score. This is not audience participation in any new and more exasperating form so do please relax and be quite natural. What we are doing is by way of being an experiment and it is an experiment we can only carry through successfully by at some stage in the production taking the audience – that is your good selves – into our confidence. We do this as much for our own sake as yours. We want you to be quite spontaneous. And that is why I am here now. To take you into our confidence. It is as I say a new technique and we do have of course a huge barrier to break down of prejudice if not outright hostility from those who are not fully conversant with what we are trying to do. Any opportunity of making45our aims and methods more widely known is something we are always very glad to have extended to us and I on this occasion am very grateful to both you and those responsible for this production for being allowed to put you in the picture. This is a technique which can be used for any kind of stage production. Any production whatever that it is possible to mount on a stage where we have apparatus installed comes within our scope. But it is absolutely essential in every case for the audience to be as it were receptive to the need, if we are to be one hundred per cent effective, of as I say complete spontaneity. What we want, briefly, are your reactions. As you know, all of us react in the theatre. Laughter. Laughter is nothing more or less than a reaction. If we instinctively feel something to be funny, we laugh. In other words, we react. Now we have literally thousands of feet of microfilm on which we have recorded these reactions as and when they have occurred. These recordings we match up with recordings made on other reels of microfilm, recordings of whatever on the stage has acted as the stimulus for each reaction recorded. Let me illustrate. At one point in the performance, shall we say, a witticism comes into play. This witticism is picked up by our very sensitive detectors which also break it down into molecules. There is a reason for this. An author who makes use of our records gains a complete and accurate picture not only of the effectiveness of a given witticism as a whole, but is enabled to see, as though under a microscope, just which part of that witticism achieved maximum response. So you can see how essential it is that every member of the audience should react at optimum spontaneity from beginning to end of the performance. This ensures that at any given stage in the production the laughter response index which we pass on to the author and producer is as accurate and reliable as science can make it. Because that of course is what we are out to do. We hope in time with46the co-operation of theatre managements and audiences all over the country to build up in microfilm a library which will embody the case histories in terms of audience reaction of a sufficiently large and representative number of productions of all kinds to do away with the need for inspired guesswork on the part of author or producer. Will this be funny? Or is one part of this likely to be more funny than some other, perhaps less funny, part? This is the kind of question the writer of comedy is always having to ask himself, and it's the kind of question we on the technical side feel we can supply a reliable answer to. And not only, of course, the writer of comedy. In tragedy too – where of course the response to be successful must always be a rather different response from that evoked by comedy – I hope I'm not holding up the action too much, but what we do feel we want to get established, and get more and more established, is the very real part we on the technical side can play. As I say, the writer of tragedy with his stock-in-trade of pity and terror is working just as much in the dark as his colleague of the comic muse. How much pity? Just what degree of terror? And so on. If there was audience resistance, what caused it? This is another question which, by classifying the laughter and tears we pick up, we can often answer for the bewildered author. If his audience according to our records are viscerotonic endomorphs, this may explain why his play, written shall we say, for cerebrotonic ectomorphs, fails to achieve saturation impact. And now I think I have held up the production long enough. I would only like to say in conclusion that we have the technique, and are only waiting for the green light to go right ahead and take the guesswork out of the inspiration for the ultimate benefit of you, the audience. Thank you for listening to me – and before I do finally finish, I would like to say how much we have been helped, very materially helped, by the way everyone responsible for this production47down to the author himself has done everything possible to give us all the facilities we have asked for. And of course you, the audience, have given us what is our very life blood – your spontaneity. Thank you very much.
He goes out. Lights come up in the living room. Bro Paradock and the two comedians are in various parts of the room, silent and blank. Middie Paradock enters with a tray of coffee cups and a jug of coffee.
Mrs Paradock
Did you think I was never coming?
Mr Paradock
Ah, coffee.
Mrs Paradock
Get the books out, Bro, will you?
First Comedian
Don't get them out for me, Mrs Paradock. I never read.
Mrs Paradock
Perhaps Bug would like a book with his coffee?
Second Comedian
I do like a short book with coffee. Thank you, Mrs Paradock.
Mrs Paradock
Now come on. Here's a place for you, Bug. Help Hamster to a chair, Bro. He's wearing his shoes crooked this week and I know they're hurting him. There are plenty of books at your elbow, Bug, and more in the bookcase if you want them. Hamster: now what are you reading?
First Comedian
Nothing for me, thank you, Mrs Paradock. Just the coffee.
Mrs Paradock
I can't get used to you not reading with your coffee.
Second Comedian
He never has, Mrs Paradock.
Mrs Paradock
Are we all settled? Come on, Bro. What are you going to have? Fiction, biography? I think I'll help myself to this textbook.
48
Second Comedian
It looks rather nice.
Mrs Paradock
Yes. Now we can all have a good read with our coffee.
Mr Paradock
Shall I see what's on the wireless while we're reading?
Mrs Paradock
That's right, Bro. See what's on. It ought to be the service.
Mr Paradock
(looking at his watch) It'll be starting.
Bro Paradock tunes in the wireless and all except First Comedian continue reading throughout. The prayers heard from the wireless are intoned in a voice of cultured Anglican fatuity, and the responses said in low-toned earnestness by a small chorus of voices, which is joined by First Comedian in an undertone.
Prayer
…weep at the elastic as it stretches:
Mr Paradock
It's started.
Response
And rejoice that it might have been otherwise.
Prayer
Let us sing because round things roll:
Response
And rejoice that it might have been otherwise.
Prayer
Let us praise God for woodlice, and for buildings sixty-nine feet three inches high:
Response
For Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations published in 1776:
Prayer
For the fifth key from the left on the lower manual of the organ of the Church of the Ascension in the Piazza Vittorio Emanuele II in the town of Castelfidardo in Italy:
Response
And for gnats.
Prayer
How flat are our trays:
49
Response
Our sewers how underground and rat-infested altogether.
Prayer
As the roots of a tree strike downwards:
Response
So fire burns.
Prayer
As a river flows always towards its mouth:
Response
So is sugar sweet.
Prayer
Let us laugh therefore and be glad for the Balearic Islands:
Response
And sing with joy in the presence of dyspepsia.
Prayer
Let us give praise for those who compile dictionaries in large buildings, for the suitably clad men and women on our commons and in our hotels, for all those who in the fullness of time will go out to meet whatever fate awaits them, for the tall, the ham-fisted, the pompous and for all men everywhere and at all times.
Response
Amen.
Prayer
Let us give thanks for air hostesses and such as sit examinations, for the Bessemer process and for canticles, that all who live in France may be called Frenchmen and that nothing may be called useful that has no purpose.
Response
Amen.
Prayer
Let us talk and itch and swim and paint:
Response
Let us talk and itch and swim and paint.
Prayer
Let us make music, water, love and rabbit hutches:
Response
Let us make music, water, love and rabbit hutches.
Prayer
Let us be brave and punctual:
Response
And vituperative and good-looking.
50
Prayer
Let us laugh with those we tickle:
Response
Let us laugh with those we tickle.
Prayer
Let us weep with those we expose to tear gas:
Response
Let us weep with those we expose to tear gas.
Prayer
Let us throw back our heads and laugh at reality:
Response
Which is an illusion caused by mescaline deficiency.
Prayer
At sanity:
Response
Which is an illusion caused by alcohol deficiency.
Prayer
At knowledge: which is an illusion caused by certain biochemical changes in the human brain structure during the course of human evolution, which had it followed another course would have produced other biochemical changes in the human brain structure, by reason of which knowledge as we now experience it would have been beyond the reach of our wildest imaginings; and by reason of which, what is now beyond the reach of our wildest imaginings would have been familiar and commonplace. Let us laugh at these things. Let us laugh at thought:
Response
Which is a phenomenon like any other.
Prayer
At illusion:
Response
Which is an illusion, which is a phenomenon like any other.
Prayer
Let us love diversity:
Response
Because there is neither end nor purpose to it.
Prayer
Let us love simplicity:
Response
Because there is neither end nor purpose to it.
51
Prayer
Let us think, and think we think, because leaves are green and because stones fall and because volcanoes erupt in a world where seas are salt.
Response
Amen.
The introductory bars of 'Sweet Polly Oliver' in an orchestrated version are heard from the wireless. First Comedian gets to his feet.
First Comedian
I think this is where we stand, isn't it?
The Second Comedian, Bro and Middie Paradock have become aware of the music and begin to stand. Rather self-consciously they join in the hymn-like singing of 'Sweet Polly Oliver'. There is a momentary silence when the song ends, and then to neutralise their embarrassment they all try to be excessively normal.
Mrs Paradock
Now. Have we all had enough coffee?
Second Comedian
It was splendid coffee, Mrs Paradock. You must show me how you make it.
Mr Paradock
Middie's coffee is made by a secret process, Bug. Wild horses wouldn't drag it out of her.
First Comedian
In that case we'll be making up ingenious excuses for coming round here every evening for coffee, Mrs Paradock.
Mrs Paradock
You're both very welcome. Bro and I need some good comedians in the house to prevent us quarrelling all the time.
Second Comedian
That's a bargain, then, Mrs Paradock. We supply the comedy, you supply the coffee.
First Comedian
And if our comedy's as good as your coffee, Mrs Paradock, we shall all be more than satisfied.
Mrs Paradock
Well, if no one wants any more coffee, I'll clear away the cups.
52
Middie Paradock puts the cups and saucers onto the tray and takes this outside.
First Comedian
Did you know that a female cod can be the mother of eight million eggs?
Mr Paradock
No.
First Comedian
Eight million.
Second Comedian
It's the apotheosis of irresponsibility.
Mr Paradock
There'd be no counting them – not if there were eight million of them. Except on the fingers of eight hundred thousand pairs of hands.
Second Comedian
Eight hundred thousand people to count the eggs of a single cod! It's ludicrous.
Mr Paradock
And yet they call a female god a goddess.
First Comedian
There's no accounting for it.
Second Comedian
I'm not sure that I want to account for it. It's one of those things my imagination wilts at.
Mr Paradock
I always thought you had a pretty strong imagination.
First Comedian
He hasn't. Not for that sort of thing. He picked up an imaginary chair yesterday. I thought he was handling it remarkably easily, and when he sat down on it I knew why. It just crumpled up under him.
Second Comedian
I should think Bro has got a strong imagination. Let's see you lift an imaginary chair, Bro, by the back legs.
Mr Paradock
How?
First Comedian
Get hold of it by the two back legs. Keep your arms straight out in front of you and see if you can bring it up to shoulder height. And hold it there.
53
Mr Paradock
Where do I get the chair from?
Second Comedian
Imagine it.
Mr Paradock
Shall I?
First Comedian
Go on.
Bro Paradock squats on his haunches, gets up and removes his jacket, squats again and adjusts his position before going through the motions of taking a grip on the back legs of a chair. His efforts to stand up with it are successful but strenuous. First Comedian picks up a chair which he places in Bro Paradock's outstretched hands. He holds this chair without effort.
Mr Paradock
That's extraordinary! I'd never have believed it.
Second Comedian
You were letting your imagination run away with you.
Mr Paradock
I'd never have believed it. The one I imagined I was lifting was twice as heavy as this one.
First Comedian
You've just got a strong imagination. You're like me. I use it to develop my muscles.
Second Comedian
Why don't you two have a contest of strength? We'll ask Mrs Paradock for a pair of scales when she comes in. See which of you can hang the heaviest weight on them.
First Comedian
What do you say, Bro?
Mr Paradock
I'm game if you are.
He goes to the door, opens it and puts his head out.
Middie! Have we still got those scales?
Middie Paradock is heard off: 'As far as I know. What do you want them for?'
I'll go and get them now.
54
Bro Paradock goes out. Several seconds later Middie Paradock comes in, followed by Bro Paradock with the scales.
Mrs Paradock
I hear you're going to have a trial of strength between you.
Second Comedian
Not me, Mrs Paradock. It's these two.
Mrs Paradock
I'm surprised Bro's got a strong imagination – I'd never have said so.
Second Comedian
Who's going to hold the scales? Shall I hold them while you two get ready?
Mr Paradock
Isn't it going to be a bit heavy for you when we both put weights on the end?
First Comedian
Don't worry about Bug. His imagination isn't as strong as yours and mine, Bro. He won't register more than a pound or two.
Second Comedian
I shall be all right. Now then. Here it is. As soon as you're both ready.
Mr Paradock
(looking at First Comedian) Shall we start?
First Comedian
Right. Here goes.
Both pretend to be lifting massive weights, with which they stagger towards the scales held by Second Comedian. As they simultaneously hang their weights on opposite arms of the scales, Second Comedian's arm dips slightly as he takes the strain. The balance remains horizontal.
Mrs Paradock
Nothing in it. Fancy that.
Mr Paradock
(panting) I don't know what was in it. It weighed like cement.
Mrs Paradock
Bug seems to be managing it without much difficulty.
55
First Comedian
Better put it down now, Bug. It's putting too much strain on the scales. You'll have the joint starting.
Second Comedian
(lifting each load onto the floor in turn) I don't know about cement. It feels like something a whole lot lighter than cement to me.
Mrs Paradock
You must be stronger in the muscles, Bug.
Second Comedian
It's his imagination, Mrs Paradock. It isn't equal to it.
Mrs Paradock
Is that what it is?
Silence.
You forgot to ring up about the elephant, Bro.
Mr Paradock
I thought you'd seen about it.
Mrs Paradock
I have now. They're delivering it in the morning.
Second Comedian
As for elephants, I must say we've started a fine lot of hares this evening. Don't you think so?
Mr Paradock
March hares.
First Comedian
We've started them all right. A whole lot of mad March hares streaking hell for leather across the open country.
Second Comedian
And not one but will drop in its tracks before these worthy people pick up the scent.
All turn to gaze thoughtfully at the audience.
Mrs Paradock
What a shame we can't give them a run for their money with tortoises.
Curtain.

Act 2
The living room. Bro Paradock, hands in pockets, is staring thoughtfully out through the window. Middie Paradock turns away from the window.
Mrs Paradock
It'll have to stay out.
Bro Paradock turns slowly away and crosses the room.
Mr Paradock
What are the measurements?
Mrs Paradock
You don't need measurements. A thing that size in a prefab.
Mr Paradock
I thought we were living in a bungalow.
Mrs Paradock
People will think we're trying to go one better than everybody else.
Mr Paradock
It's only once a year for goodness' sake! You should have kept the measurements.
Mrs Paradock
I should have gone for it myself instead of ringing. (Turns to look out of the window.) Look at it. Look at its great ears flapping about. Surely they know by now what size we always have.
Mr Paradock
Perhaps they've sent us the wrong one.
Mrs Paradock
It's big enough for a hotel. If you had a hotel or a private school or something you wouldn't need a thing that size.
Mr Paradock
I suppose not.
Mrs Paradock
And supposing it goes berserk in the night? I'm not getting up to it.
57
Mr Paradock
Why should it go berserk in the night any more than a smaller one?
Mrs Paradock
We'll have old Mrs Stencil round again if it does – threatening us with the RSPCA.
Mr Paradock
You should have been in when they came with it, then you could have queried the measurements.
Mrs Paradock
I can't think what we're going to call it. We can't call it Mr Trench again.
Mr Paradock
The only time we've not called it Mr Trench was three years ago when we had to make do with a giraffe.
Mrs Paradock
And look at the fuss we had before they'd take it in part exchange.
Mr Paradock
Of course they made a fuss. There was something wrong with it.
Mrs Paradock
(looking through the window) Imagine calling a clumsy great thing that size Mr Trench.
Mr Paradock
Why not?
Mrs Paradock
We can't go on year after year calling it Mr Trench.
Mr Paradock
You talk as if it were the same animal every time.
Mrs Paradock
You can hear the neighbours, can't you? They'll think we never launch out.
Mr Paradock
I know what you want to call it.
Mrs Paradock
It looks all the time as if we were hard up for a name to give the animal.
Mr Paradock
You want to call it Oedipus Rex, don't you?
58
Mrs Paradock
It's better than Mr Trench year after year. At least it sounds as if we knew what was going on in the world.
Mr Paradock
Oedipus Rex! (He wags a finger archly through the window.) Ah, ah! Only the edible blooms remember, Oedipus.
Mrs Paradock
If you say it in that tone of voice of course it sounds ridiculous.
Mr Paradock
(in same tone) Oedipus! Oedipus! You're letting that glass take all your weight!
Mrs Paradock
Anything else would sound equally as ridiculous if you said it like that.
Mr Paradock
It isn't Mr Trench we want a change from.
Mrs Paradock
The only thing to do is ring up the Zoo. Tell them to come and collect it.
Mr Paradock
And be without an elephant at all?
Mrs Paradock
Tell them to come and collect it and the sooner the better. I'd rather not have one.
Mr Paradock
I beg to differ.
Mrs Paradock
We did without one the year we had a giraffe instead.
Mr Paradock
I know we did without one the year we had a giraffe instead. And look at the trouble we had getting it changed. I don't want that all over again.
Mrs Paradock
It's the RSPCA I'm worried about.
Mr Paradock
They haven't been round yet. In any case you wouldn't get the Zoo at this time. They'll be closed.
Mrs Paradock
I don't know why they couldn't send us what we asked for in the first place.
59
Mr Paradock
Is it any use trying to get hold of Eddie on the phone?
Mrs Paradock
Yes. Ring Eddie up. Or Nora. Nora'd be sure to know what to do. They used to keep pigeons and things. They had a room full of nothing else but different kinds of birds when they were all living at No. 89, and white mice and things.
Mr Paradock
It'll have to stay outside tonight.
Mrs Paradock
I'm not having it in the kitchen, if that's what you're leading up to.
Mr Paradock
If it starts straying all over the place during the night we shall have the RSPCA making a lot of difficulties.
Mrs Paradock
Not if we get it changed first thing. Get on to Nora.
Mr Paradock
If we're getting it changed first thing in the morning, where's the sense in thinking up a name like Oedipus Rex for it now?
Mrs Paradock
Because I'm not calling it Mr Trench six years running. You can if you like. I'm not.
Mr Paradock
I didn't want to call it Mr Trench the year it was a giraffe. That was your idea. It was your idea it would make a pleasant change to be giving the name to a giraffe instead of an elephant. Now you complain about calling it Mr Trench six years running.
Mrs Paradock
I think we'd be better off without it.
Mr Paradock
How would we?
Mrs Paradock
I do really. I think we'd be better off without. We've done nothing except bicker ever since they came with it.
60
Mr Paradock
We weren't in when they came with it.
Mrs Paradock
That's the whole point.
Both relapse into silence. Bro Paradock takes up a paper. He looks up after an interval from his paper.
Mr Paradock
If we're going to change the name at all I can't see what you've got against Hodge for that matter.
Mrs Paradock
Hodge is all right for a monkey.
Mr Paradock
We'll go through some names and see what we can agree on. Hodge.
Mrs Paradock
Hodge for a monkey. Gush for an elephant.
Mr Paradock
Admiral Benbow.
Mrs Paradock
Hiram B. Larkspur.
Mr Paradock
Playboy.
Mrs Paradock
Killed-with-kindness Corcoran.
Mr Paradock
New-wine-into-old-bottles Backhouse.
Mrs Paradock
'Tis-pity-she's-a-whore Hignett.
Mr Paradock
Lucifer.
Mrs Paradock
Stonehenge.
Mr Paradock
Haunch.
Mr Paradock / Mrs Paradock
(together) Splinter.
Mr Paradock
Thank God we can agree on something. Now I can ring Eddie.
Mrs Paradock
Why ring up Eddie when you've got Nora who's had experience with animals? She could probably suggest something.
Mr Paradock
(dialling) So you keep saying.
61
Mrs Paradock
Well?
Mr Paradock
Is that Mrs Mortice? …Oh… Will you? Thank you.
Mrs Paradock
You've decided to ring Nora, then.
Mr Paradock
(ignores her) Hello. Nora? …Yes, thank you, Nora. And how are you? …Oh? And what's that, Nora? …A what? …Hold on a moment, Nora… Yes… Yes… Hold on, Nora. Wait till I fetch Middie.
Mrs Paradock
Don't say they've got ours.
Mr Paradock
It's a snake. She says they ordered a snake and they've got one that's too short.
Mrs Paradock
Too short for what?
Mr Paradock
She says they're worried about the RSPCA.
Mrs Paradock
(takes up phone) Nora? …Yes, Bro was telling me. Isn't it maddening? …Yes… Yes – they've done exactly the same with us… No. About ten times too big. I don't know what the vanman was thinking about. A thing that size in a bungalow… Not indoors, no. We've got it out at the back… Yes. I think you're quite justified… No… No… Not till the morning, Nora. Bro thinks they'll be closed now anyway.
Mr Paradock
Why not ask her if she'd like to have Mr Trench and we'll take the snake off her.
Mrs Paradock
What? …No, I was talking to Bro, Nora. I think he's got some suggestion to make. I'll get him to tell you himself. (Puts her hand over the mouthpiece.) You talk to her. She's on about this snake of theirs.
Mr Paradock
What about it, Nora? If yours is on the short side it might do us very nicely… And you're welcome to Mr Trench… Yes. We don't need anything… No trouble at all, Nora… Yes? Well, that's better still… I'll come62round with it, then… No… No, I'll remember… Yes, in about half an hour, then. Goodbye, Nora.
Mrs Paradock
Thank goodness we rang them up.
Mr Paradock
Did she say how short this snake was?
Mrs Paradock
She didn't give any measurements, if that's what you mean.
Mr Paradock
I thought perhaps you might have thought to ask her what the measurements were.
Mrs Paradock
Why didn't you ask her for the measurements yourself as far as that goes?
Mr Paradock
How was I to know whether you'd asked already?
Mrs Paradock
You heard me talking to her.
Mr Paradock
What have you done with my gumboots?
Mrs Paradock
What do you want gumboots for to go down the road a few doors with an elephant? Where are your other shoes?
Mr Paradock
These are my other shoes I've got on.
Mrs Paradock
And I should come straight back with Mr Trench. We don't want Mrs Stencil asking a lot of questions.
Mr Paradock
I notice you're all for calling it Mr Trench now you know it's a snake.
Mrs Paradock
What are you going to bring it back in? You can't have it on a lead like a canary.
Mr Paradock
In any case I thought we'd settled on Hodge for a name.
Mrs Paradock
Hodge for a jackal. Gush for an anaconda.
63
Mr Paradock
Admiral Benbow.
Mrs Paradock
Hiram B. Larkspur.
Mr Paradock
Playboy.
Mrs Paradock
We'll see how short it is first.
Mr Paradock
The only thing I've ever seen on a lead is a dog. I've never seen a canary on a lead.
Mrs Paradock
A dog on a lead, then.
Mr Paradock
I hate this job.
Mrs Paradock
You say that every year.
Mr Paradock
I've never had to do it before.
Mrs Paradock
You say it about other things.
Mr Paradock
If it comes to that, how do you know it is an anaconda?
Mrs Paradock
What else would it be? We shall have the RSPCA round while you stand there.
Mr Paradock
Good God!
He goes out.
Mrs Paradock
(slowly moving her head from side to side) Admiral Benbow!
Bro Paradock comes back into the room with his collar turned up. He turns it down and shakes rain from his jacket.
You're not back already?
Mr Paradock
I'm not going in this rain.
Mrs Paradock
It's barely started.
Mr Paradock
I don't want to get mixed up in a lot of rain. I haven't got a hat for that sort of thing.
64
Mrs Paradock
You've got an eyeshield. What's wrong with that?
Mr Paradock
You gave it away.
Mrs Paradock
I don't mean that one. I mean the one you wear for tennis.
Mr Paradock
But that's to keep the sun out of my eyes.
Mrs Paradock
Can't you wear it back to front?
Pause.
Mr Paradock
What a coincidence! Uncle Fred! That's just what Uncle Fred used to do. When he was at sea. He used to wear an eyeshield back to front rather than be put to the expense of a sou'wester. It deflected the rainwater from his neck and the elastic band passed conveniently across his mouth like a horse's bit.
A knock at the door. Middie Paradock goes to open it.
Mrs Paradock
That would be too ingenious for you, of course.
Nora is at the door.
Nora! You're drenched! Come in.
Nora
I thought I'd better come over with this as soon as I saw it was raining. (Fumbles in her handbag.) I'm afraid I get terribly wet in these showers. I just haven't got that kind of a hat, I suppose. (Takes out a pencil box.) There. I said it was short, didn't I?
Mrs Paradock
Good gracious. Do I open it?
Mr Paradock
That's never an anaconda.
Mrs Paradock
Would Nora have brought it over if it had been? Perhaps I'll leave it in its loosebox. We don't want it eavesdropping.
65
She puts the box, without opening it, on the mantelpiece.
Nora
(looks into the mirror) Goodness! My make-up.
Mrs Paradock
Let me see. Oh, no. I think she's done very well, Bro, don't you? I admire you for coming out in it at all.
Mr Paradock
It's a very good attempt, Nora. It takes a pretty good hat to manage a shower like that one. I didn't even try it. Not with my poor old hat.
Nora
I don't know about that, Bro. I wouldn't mind having a hat like yours, anyway.
Mrs Paradock
Hats aren't everything in this world. Far from it.
Mr Paradock
I know they aren't everything.
Nora
Some people seem to get by quite nicely without them. In fact I've often noticed it's the ones who haven't any hats at all who live the most satisfying lives in the long run.
Mr Paradock
It isn't so much having the hats as knowing how to make the best use of them.
Mrs Paradock
We can't all be blessed with hats.
Mr Paradock
Look at Mrs Blackboy's husband and the showers he's got through in his time with that plastic shopping bag he carries round on his head.
Nora
Or Bella for that matter. Bella's up half the night sometimes weatherproofing that old straw beehive she goes out in whenever she's got rain to cope with.
Mrs Paradock
And a lot of those who are supposed to have such wonderful hats are going around half the time in other people's. I haven't got much time for them. They got them out of Christmas crackers more likely than not.
66
Mr Paradock
I don't like to see the time Bella spends on millinery. That sort of thing's all right if you've got millinery in your make-up. Otherwise leave it alone.
Mrs Paradock
Bro's not much of a one for millinery.
Mr Paradock
I don't get the time. I've got other things to do. Nora and I prefer to leave the showers to the ones with the hats, unless we're compelled to tackle them. And then we don't do too badly, eh, Nora?
Mrs Paradock
Nora's got plenty of hats, as you well know. Take no notice of him, Nora. He's only acting the fool. You shouldn't be so rude to people, Bro. It's lucky Nora knows you.
Nora
Oh, I've never made any pretensions to hats.
Mrs Paradock
You're too modest, Nora.
Mr Paradock
I've always known what I could do, and I've always known what I couldn't do. That's one of the reasons why I never became an air hostess.
Nora
Hasn't your Myrtle got a fine little hat on her head? I was noticing it only the other day.
Mrs Paradock
I don't know where she gets it from, then! Although I must say she didn't do too badly in her storm test last week. I will give Myrtle her due – she doesn't seem to worry much what weather she goes out in.
Mr Paradock
She gets it from Stan if she gets it from anybody. Or Uncle Fred.
Nora
Do you know what I think? It would never surprise me if Myrtle didn't turn out to be something of a storm-breaker before she's finished. She's got the hats for it.
Mrs Paradock
You're joking, Nora.
Mr Paradock
What about Uncle Fred, then? He did very nicely for himself with his eyeshield.
67
Mrs Paradock
Exactly. It's Uncle Fred's eyeshield that got him where he was – you couldn't call him a natural storm-breaker. (To Nora.) Uncle Fred was Bro's uncle in the navy, Nora.
Mr Paradock
He used to wear his eyeshield back to front so as to protect his neck from the rainwater.
Mrs Paradock
Anybody would think he was a positive sou'wester man the way you talk.
Mr Paradock
It wasn't that he didn't have a sou'wester, so much as that he could never get round to putting it on.
Mrs Paradock
He never had one. You know perfectly well he used to borrow quite shamelessly from the other men whenever there was an important storm at sea and he couldn't get by with just his eyeshield.
Nora
(loudly) Aha! Whose is the waste-paper basket? It looks rather interesting.
Mrs Paradock
That's Mr Malden's. We lent him a couple of lampshades Myrtle has grown out of for his little boy; he said we were welcome to his waste-paper basket if we could make anything of it.
Mr Paradock
It might be all right for Myrtle when she's older. It looks to me like one he had when he was at school.
Nora
I rather think Myrtle's father has got his eye on it too, if I'm not too much mistaken.
Mrs Paradock
He's tried it on for size. Didn't you, Bro? One night last week. But he won't be seen out in it.
Mr Paradock
That sort of thing's all right for the summer.
Nora
(looks through the window) Thank goodness it seems to have stopped raining, for the time being anyway.
68
Mrs Paradock
Oh, splendid. Now you can take Mr Trench across to Nora's, Bro.
Nora
I'll have to be going, then. I don't want to be out when you call, Bro.
Mrs Paradock
That would never do, would it?
Mr Paradock
It was lucky you got here when you did, Nora. I was just setting out. We might have missed each other.
Nora
We might.
Mrs Paradock
Not if you were both going the same way.
Mr Paradock
We could hardly be going the same way when Nora was going in one direction and I was going in the other. How could we have been going the same way?
Mrs Paradock
If you like, Nora, I'll hold Bro back for a few minutes. That'll give you time to get in and turn round before he comes knocking on the door.
She holds him by the collar.
Nora
If you're sure it won't throw you out?
Mrs Paradock
Of course it won't. It's no trouble keeping Bro back for twenty minutes or so. Especially when you're helping us out by taking the elephant off our hands.
Nora
It'll be nice to get something with some size to it, believe me. I only hope you find you can make do with Bees' Wedding there. It was hopelessly short for us.
Mrs Paradock
You've got the upstairs as well, of course, haven't you?
Nora
And the cellar. We just can't do with anything smaller. We've managed in the past with a rhinoceros – we had that one the year before last, but it was barely large enough.
69
Mrs Paradock
This one's a ridiculous size for us in this bungalow. We always like to have an elephant, of course, if we can, but we can't cope with one this size.
Nora
What have you called it?
Mrs Paradock
To tell you the truth, Nora, we haven't called it anything yet.
Bro, still held firmly by the collar, has a barely perceptible spasm.
We've hardly had time to get round to discussing names at all, and when we do we only seem to quarrel.
Nora
Are you like that, too? We quarrel all the time over names.
Mrs Paradock
Oh yes. We lose all control. Names and food. It's the only thing worth quarrelling about after all, isn't it?
Nora
Every animal we've ever had all the time we've been here has been called 'Retreat from Moscow', whether it's been the one we ordered or not. We just can't agree on anything else, and so every year we end up calling it 'Retreat from Moscow'.
Mrs Paradock
Never mind, Nora. Perhaps we'll be able to do without animals altogether one of these days.
Nora
What a hope! But I mustn't keep you standing there with Bro. If you could just let him come on to us in about twenty minutes that'll give me time to open the gate at the back.
Mrs Paradock
Goodbye, then, Nora. We'll be calling in on Sunday, remember.
Nora
Make it as early as you can. Goodbye, Middie.
Mrs Paradock
Goodbye.
70
Nora goes out and Mrs Paradock closes the door, releasing Bro Paradock, who crosses the room, straightening his jacket.
Mr Paradock
What did you mean about that waste-paper basket? Telling her I tried it on.
Mrs Paradock
Nora knew what I meant. It's just a private joke between us.
Mr Paradock
I should think so.
Mrs Paradock
I was surprised at you, if it comes to that. Starting her off on all that long rigmarole about hats. You know what always happens whenever we get on to that subject.
Mr Paradock
I thought most of what she said was very sensible.
Mrs Paradock
Bringing Uncle Fred into it like that.
Mr Paradock
There was no need to disparage him in front of her and make everyone feel uncomfortable.
Mrs Paradock
There was no need to bring Uncle Fred into it in the first place and then leave it to Nora to change the subject.
Mr Paradock
Change what subject?
Mrs Paradock
About the waste-paper basket. That was only to get you off Uncle Fred.
Mr Paradock
I thought you said that was a private joke between the two of you.
Mrs Paradock
So it was.
Mr Paradock
I can't for the life of me in that case see how it was Nora changing the subject.
Mrs Paradock
There's no point in raking over it all again71now. I just get tired, that's all, of hats, hats, hats every time anyone calls. Especially Nora.
Mr Paradock
It happened to have been raining.
Mrs Paradock
I know it happened to have been raining.
Mr Paradock
Then we can let the matter drop. Where are my gumboots?
Mrs Paradock
You don't need gumboots to go down the road a few doors with an elephant. Where are your other shoes?
Mr Paradock
These are my other shoes I've got on.
Mrs Paradock
And I should come straight back with Mr Trench. We don't want Mrs Stencil asking a lot of questions.
Mr Paradock
I notice you're all for calling it Mr Trench now you know it's going to somebody else.
Mrs Paradock
We've been through all this before. For goodness' sake pull yourself together. We shall have the RSPCA round while you stand there.
Mr Paradock
Perhaps we shall. Perhaps we shan't.
He goes out. Middie Paradock sits down at the table with a glossy magazine.
The lights fade out in the living room and a half-light reveals two cleaners who, as they sweep perfunctorily, resting between bouts, are overheard in conversation.
First Cleaner
I didn't tell you about Len. He goes down the School of Building twice a week now, when he's not working.
Second Cleaner
There's a lot of chances for them these days. More than what we had when we was their age.
72
First Cleaner
He misses his darts now he can't go down The Grapes Tuesdays.
Second Cleaner
Like Charlie with his wireless.
First Cleaner
He won the darts championship the other week, his team.
Second Cleaner
He misses his wireless. He always goes to the cupboard first thing when he gets in off leave. 'Mum,' he says, 'what you done with the soldering iron?' He come home Sunday.
First Cleaner
Len'll have to go soon.
Second Cleaner
Goes back Sunday night. He's put in for apprentice fitter but he don't know if he'll hear anything.
First Cleaner
He was talking about getting deferred, but I said to him, 'If you get deferred you'll only have it hanging over you.'
Second Cleaner
Charlie's made one or two pals where he is. They get a bit fed up with all the routine.
First Cleaner
They all do. It's only natural.
Second Cleaner
Everything has to be done to orders and that.
First Cleaner
What Len's hoping is he'll get in the Raf. That's what he's started down at the School of Building for, so he can say he's done something.
Second Cleaner
How's Gran?
First Cleaner
Up and down. She can't get about like she used.
Second Cleaner
You heard about Mrs Jarvis?
First Cleaner
Flo told me.
73
Second Cleaner
She'll have his pension, but it's not the same.
First Cleaner
Mr Braithwaite went round from the chapel. Spoke very nice. Said to keep praying and that. 'The Lord will provide, Mrs Jarvis,' he said.
Second Cleaner
He can't give her what Jarvis could.
First Cleaner
Shh! You'll have them dirty old men out the back listening.
Second Cleaner
It's true, isn't it? I reckon she'll miss him that way unless she can find somebody else.
First Cleaner
I didn't tell you what old Mrs Croskett told me when she was round Mrs Jarvis's.
Second Cleaner
I didn't know she'd been round there.
First Cleaner
She's been round there twice. So's Mrs Blench. They both said you wouldn't have thought there was nothing wrong with him to see him eat the night before, and then next day he come over funny at work.
Second Cleaner
Remember last winter when he was down with the gastric and nobody couldn't say what it was?
First Cleaner
I'll tell you when I started putting two and two together a bit – you know he had that great thick overcoat? The one he had for when he was going anywhere? She's got that out, so Mrs Croskett was saying, and she's got all the seams unpicked and she's going to put a bit of felt lining under it after she's cut it up, and make mats out of it.
Second Cleaner
Isn't that Else over there, coming across?
Middie Paradock appears as though relaxing off the set.
74
First Cleaner
I didn't know you'd decided to have another go at the stage, Else.
Mrs Paradock
It's only while Fred's on night work. I thought I'd keep my hand in. I never expected to see you here, though.
Second Cleaner
You used to be all for gay parts.
Mrs Paradock
This one's not so bad. It makes a change.
Second Cleaner
I don't know how you can remember your lines – it sounds like a lot of rigmarole to me.
First Cleaner
Everything's that trend nowadays.
Mrs Paradock
It's all right if you don't think about it. A lot of it's supposed to be symbolic, but you get used to it.
Second Cleaner
I don't know, I'm sure.
First Cleaner
How's Fred, Else?
Mrs Paradock
Fred's fine, thanks, Mrs Gride. We're going down the tabernacle Sundays now. There's a new man there. Mr Brice. Took Mr Jabez' place Christmas. He gets a good crowd Sunday evenings.
Second Cleaner
That's nice.
Mrs Paradock
Fred's very taken with him. We're going to go to the midweek service when he's on early turn if I can get away.
First Cleaner
Wasn't Edie telling us about a Mr Brice?
Mrs Paradock
We saw Edie there Sunday. He was ever so good on 'What the Church Means to Me'. He's going through all different aspects: at home, you know, and at work and that. Next week it's 'What the Church Means to Me on Holiday'. He gets a lot going up the mercy seat every Sunday. Fred was on at me to go up but I had my old coat on.
75
Second Cleaner
You feel everybody's looking at you, like when Mrs Leakey stood up and give testimony that time we had the women's meeting in the Temperance Hall.
First Cleaner
The Temperance Hall was when we went down Eastbourne with the outing.
Second Cleaner
That's right. Surely you remember Mrs Leakey? Kep' on all the way back in the coach about she's saved, she's saved all the time.
Mrs Paradock
It's the thanksgiving Sunday week. Why don't you and Mrs Gride come over?
Second Cleaner
We'll see what the weather does, Else dear. It's a long way with my legs – the journey knocks me over.
First Cleaner
(nodding towards the set) You look as if you're wanted, Else.
Mrs Paradock
(waves her hand) It's only Sam, but I suppose I'd better go. Must be time. I expect you'll both be gone by the time I'm finished so I'll say goodbye. Goodbye, Mrs Gride. Remember me to Len. Goodbye, Mrs Quiller.
She goes back to the set, which remains in darkness. The rest of the stage remains dimly lit. A spotlight is turned on to the cleaners.
First Cleaner
Goodness! They've turned the lights on us!
Second Cleaner
That'll be Bert's idea of a joke.
They gather up buckets and mops and hustle each other out.
They've properly caught us with our trousers down.
First Cleaner
Shh! You'll have us locked up!
76
Blackout. Lights in the set go up. Middie Paradock is sitting at the table as before, reading a glossy magazine. She puts it away, and begins a game of patience.
Mrs Paradock
(without looking up) Come in.
She continues in thought, places two more cards on the table, looks towards the door and repeats 'Come in.' When nothing happens, she impatiently puts down the cards and goes to the door. As she opens it to find no one there, the two comedians enter by the door behind her, sit at the table and continue the game of patience. She turns away from the door, closing it, and speaks half to herself, and half to the two at the table, whose presence she takes for granted.
I made sure that was somebody at the door.
She stands for a moment watching the game.
Don't you two ever get tired of patience?
First Comedian
We've been drinking again, Mrs Paradock.
Mrs Paradock
So you've taken my advice, have you?
Second Comedian
We feel a whole lot tipsier for it.
Mrs Paradock
Isn't that what I told you? You never listen to me.
Second Comedian
It was that delicious ambrosia you gave us when we were here last week, Mrs Paradock. That was what put us on to drinking.
Mrs Paradock
It's a very stimulating drink. Bro and I keep coming back to it, and the surprising thing is we're always finding something fresh to make us drunk in it. I'm glad you both like it.
First Comedian
We've gone on to other things since, of course. What was it we were drinking last weekend? Bug77said he couldn't remember when a drink left him so well oiled.
Second Comedian
Raven's Blood – but I thought the name was the weakest part of it. What I enjoyed was the glass in the middle of the bottle. I spent a long time over that – just savouring it.
Mrs Paradock
Bro's in the middle of a good bottle now. I'll get him to pour you out drops of it when he comes in.
First Comedian
Where is Bro, Mrs Paradock?
Mrs Paradock
He's out with an elephant, but he should be back. We had one delivered that was too big for what we want, so we've done a sort of switch with Mrs Mortice. She's left us this snake – (Takes down pencil box from shelf.) – and Bro's taking our elephant round to her.
She opens the box.
First Comedian
It looks hardly long enough for a snake.
Mrs Paradock
You can have them lengthened, but we shan't bother.
Second Comedian
I think snakes are too long for what you generally want them for. People just like to go one better than everybody else.
Mrs Paradock
(glances out through the window) Here's Bro now.
She goes to open the door.
You've been a long time.
Bro Paradock comes in, swaying a little, but otherwise normal in his manner.
Mr Paradock
I've been in the pub on my way back. Hello, Bug. Hello, Hamster, old boy. I got stuck into a bottle in78the pub and I couldn't tear myself away. I'm trying to remember what it was called. You two would enjoy it.
Mrs Paradock
You look as if you've been having a good old drink, doesn't he, Bug? His eyes are all bloodshot…
Second Comedian
I think Mrs Paradock is the only one of us who –
Pause.
Mrs Paradock
Finish what you were going to say, Bug.
Second Comedian
No, I'd rather leave it at that, Mrs Paradock.
Mr Paradock
You were in the middle of a sentence, for God's sake!
First Comedian
He does that sometimes. He often leaves a sentence unfinished. It's more effective. It's like a sawn-off shotgun.
Mrs Paradock
(grimacing) I don't like the sound of that remark.
Mr Paradock
What's wrong with it?
Mrs Paradock
I don't like the sound of it. It sounds as if it's on the turn to me.
Mr Paradock
It would have turned before now if it was going to turn.
Second Comedian
It's only the sound of it, Mrs Paradock.
Mrs Paradock
That remark will be paradoxical tomorrow morning when it comes out of the subconscious. You can't tell me anything about paradoxes.
First Comedian
Reminds me of an old stage designer who after a lifetime of faking stage props to look genuine had to admit defeat for the first time when he had to fake something to look bogus.
79
Second Comedian
Talking about paradoxes, what about the platoon sergeant who sent his men into a wood to take cover and when they got there, said: 'You can take it easy, now, lads. We're out of the wood!'
Mrs Paradock
You men. You're all as bad as one another, with your horrible paradoxes.
Mr Paradock
Let's put the case of someone forgetting his lines on the stage at the exact point where he's supposed in the play to pretend to have forgotten them.
First Comedian
I don't think I follow. You're a bit too drunk for me.
Mr Paradock
He has to give the illusion that he's forgotten his lines. As part of the play. All right?
First Comedian
Yes. I follow that.
Mr Paradock
Now. At the precise moment when he's supposed to give the illusion of having forgotten his lines, he quite forgets what it is he has to do. His mind goes blank. So what happens? There's a pause. The pause prolongs itself. But sooner or later he remembers what it is he ought to have been doing. He ought to have been giving the impression of having been at a loss for words. There's nothing he can do about it now. The audience will have to make do with the reality instead of the illusion – which would probably have been much better. They might well have had to do without both. He might well have forgotten not only that he was supposed to stumble for words, but that there was anything he was supposed to do at all. In that case he'd have gone straight on – word perfect. Thus – the illusion of having remembered may be sustained only by forgetting, and the illusion of having forgotten only by remembering.
80
Mrs Paradock
I've only one thing against these paradoxes. They're like puns – they're just plays on words when you analyse them. I don't mind good, solid, practical puns. I don't mind a pun in real life that means something. In fact I like to see somebody using his boot as a hammer, for instance. That's a practical pun.
Mr Paradock
That can be carried too far as well.
Second Comedian
Hamster's brother-in-law's a great practical punster. I remember the time he threw a vase at a cat. It was a beauty. It did as much damage as a genuine missile and he used it to put flowers in afterwards.
A knock. Middie Paradock goes out.
Mr Paradock
It's a pity you can't use an umbrella stand in the breech of a fifteen-inch naval gun. If you could I should feel a whole lot happier about using a shell-case as a doorstop.
First Comedian
That's life, Bro. It's no use looking for an editorial in a tablecloth simply because you eat your meals off a newspaper.
Middie Paradock comes in with an opened telegram, which she is reading.
Mrs Paradock
It's Don and that motor scooter again. I shall be glad when we see the last of that craze.
Mr Paradock
What's he up to this time?
Mrs Paradock
Read it. (Hands the telegram to Bro. To the others.) He's been parking his motor scooter on that piece of waste ground again behind Rachmaninov's Second Piano Concerto.
Mr Paradock
Who does that belong to?
Mrs Paradock
It doesn't belong to anybody. It's just a piece of waste ground.
81
Mr Paradock
Then they can't stop him parking his motor scooter on it if it doesn't belong to anyone.
Second Comedian
What does the telegram say, Mrs Paradock?
Mr Paradock
(he is still holding the telegram) 'Arriving twelve-ten Euston send sandwiches.'
He hands the telegram to Second Comedian.
First Comedian
I shouldn't let that upset you, Mrs Paradock. It doesn't mean what it says.
Mr Paradock
The last time we had a telegram like this it was worded very differently.
First Comedian
I should just say nothing about the motor scooter. Say nothing to him about it. When he's gone to bed perhaps you can find a salesman to sell it to.
Mrs Paradock
I doubt it. He bought it from a buyer.
Second Comedian
You can set your minds at rest about the telegram. It's in code.
Mrs Paradock
Thank heaven for that.
Mr Paradock
How can you tell it's in code?
Second Comedian
There's no way of telling, I'm afraid. It either is or it isn't. This one is.
First Comedian
I thought it was from the beginning. The moment Mrs Paradock came in with it. You can always tell with a telegram. As Bug says, it's either in code or it isn't.
The door opens. Don, a smartly dressed woman in her twenties, comes in.
Second Comedian
Here's Don now.
Mrs Paradock
Don! Why, you've changed your sex!
82
Don
Didn't you get my telegram?
Mr Paradock
We got it all right, but it was in code.
Don
It shouldn't have been. I asked them to decode it before they sent it off.
Mrs Paradock
Never mind. I always wanted a girl.
Mr Paradock
That's the first I knew of it.
First Comedian
Now perhaps we can have that conversation we promised ourselves about the conversation we had at the Wordsworths'.
Mrs Paradock
So we can. I've been waiting to hear all about it. I expect Don there's feeling like a good long conversation after travelling up to Euston since four o'clock this morning. What were the trains like this time, Don?
Don
Don't talk about them, Mother. One long compartment after another.
Mr Paradock
Well, let's start this conversation. How was it we broke the ice at the Wordsworths'? What was it we began with? A noun clause each, wasn't it?
Don
That's right. We were all given a noun clause each – in apposition – and then we had to go round asking everyone in turn for the noun it was in apposition to, till we found the right one.
Mrs Paradock
I suppose John was as much in demand as ever with his adverbial clauses?
Don
Oh, John! John's got a thing about his adverbial clauses.
First Comedian
He can be a bit childish about them, too, at times. Over those subordinating conjunctions, for instance, that he said were prepositions.
83
Don
That was Margaret. What actually happened was that he asked for subordinating conjunctions and she handed him these prepositions thinking they were adverbs or something.
Second Comedian
And then to make matters worse she said, 'Will these do? I can never tell the difference myself.'
First Comedian
'I can never tell the difference'! What a thing to say to John of all people.
Don
You know that little spot of high colour he gets on the side of his forehead whenever he's annoyed at anything…
First Comedian
Annoyed! It was all he could do to be civil to her.
Bro Paradock stands apart from the others, staring tight-lipped into the distance.
Second Comedian
Tell them about Joe, Hamster.
First Comedian
Joe?
Don
And the figures of speech.
First Comedian
Oh. 'Give me good plain syntax,' you mean? I don't think he'd met half the figures of speech before.
Second Comedian
I happened to look up when someone put that synecdoche in front of him. 'What's this?' he said. 'Metonymy?'
First Comedian
Metonymy!
Don
What about Mrs Kapellmeister, then? Falling over herself almost for a transferred epithet every time one appeared. I suppose she was afraid someone else might get to them first.
84
Mrs Paradock
Looking at her husband sometimes, I'm surprised to hear she didn't go for oxymoron. I've never seen anyone who looks more like the original sustained metaphor than he does.
Don
He's certainly at the opposite end of the pole from her.
Mrs Paradock
It's only zeugma that keeps them together.
She goes across to where Bro Paradock is still morosely standing, while the others continue talking amongst themselves.
What's the matter with you? Moping over here on your own?
Mr Paradock
There's nothing the matter with me at all.
Mrs Paradock
Why can't you join in the conversation then? Standing here saying nothing.
Mr Paradock
I'm standing here saying nothing because I can't think of anything to say. I should have thought that was obvious.
Mrs Paradock
Can't think of anything to say! Surely you could define 'consanguinity' or something.
Mr Paradock
What chance have I had to define 'consanguinity'?
Mrs Paradock
You've had just as much chance as anybody else. For goodness' sake, come and join in the conversation even if it's only to contradict somebody.
Reluctantly, and with the look of a martyr, Mr Paradock goes towards the others.
Mr Paradock
My wife wants me to take part in the conversation.
Second Comedian
We were just saying what a good party it was, by and large.
85
Don
It would have been if that girl with co-ordinate clause written all over her face hadn't tried to monopolise Max all evening.
First Comedian
At least we were spared Charles this time with his endless paronomasia.
Don
I'd rather have Charles than that one with the dreary onomatopoeia who was doing farmyard imitations with it every five minutes.
First Comedian
Oh no. Not farmyard imitations?
Don
He was. I thought he was never going to stop, and then when Margaret asked him if he ever added to his repertoire and he did half-a-dozen new ones I could have killed her. It was only the thought of her adverbial clauses of concession that stopped me, I think.
Second Comedian
I can't say they impressed me all that much. They've nothing like the sheer architectonic qualities, for instance, of successive adjectival clauses one on top of another in the hands of a master.
Mr Paradock
Architectonic archbishops! I could give you some adjectival clauses that would scorch the seat off your pants to listen to them. (Loudly.) This is the soldier that loved the wife that poisoned the hangman that hanged the murderer that shot the assassin that stabbed the king that won the war that killed the soldier that loved the wife that poisoned the hangman that hanged the murderer that shot the assassin that stabbed the king that won the war that killed the soldier that loved the wife that…
Mrs Paradock
For goodness' sake pull yourself together! It's in bad taste. Can't you forget you're an undertaker once in a while?
Second Comedian
I never knew Bro was an undertaker.
86
First Comedian
Neither did I. I'd noticed he was always rather partial to death. Now I see why.
Mrs Paradock
It's his life.
Mr Paradock
It's just that I see things from an undertaker's point of view.
Mrs Paradock
There's no need to make everyone feel uncomfortable just because you can't arrive at a definition of 'consanguinity'. He's set his mind on defining 'consanguinity' and there's no shifting him. Everything else has to take second place when he's in this mood.
Mr Paradock
All I want is a chance to define something. It doesn't have to be 'consanguinity'. That was your suggestion. It isn't as if I often get the time for defining things.
Mrs Paradock
Or the inclination.
First Comedian
I think we'd better be off, Bug. Remember you're expecting a phone call at nine o'clock.
Second Comedian
She rang this morning.
First Comedian nudges him.
She'll be ringing me again, though, at nine o'clock. I wasn't in this morning. No one answered the phone.
First Comedian
Goodbye, Mrs Paradock.
Mrs Paradock
You're not going?
First Comedian
Bug's got a phone call he's expecting and I ought to be getting back to my filing.
Mrs Paradock
(out of Bro's hearing) He'll be all right tomorrow.
Second Comedian
We'll look in, Mrs Paradock, and see how he is.
87
Don
Don't you worry about Father. We'll get him to bed with a hot-water bottle.
They go out.
Second Comedian
Goodbye, Mrs Paradock. Goodbye, Bro.
First Comedian
Are you coming out with us, Don?
Don
I've got to go down the road a little way.
First Comedian
Goodbye, Bro. Goodbye, Mrs Paradock.
Mrs Paradock
Look after yourselves.
Middie Paradock closes the door and turns back to Bro.
A fine exhibition you made of yourself.
Mr Paradock
Where's Don?
Mrs Paradock
Gone where you can't harm her any more with your bitter words.
Mr Paradock
I think I'll have a turn in the garden.
Mrs Paradock
We haven't got a garden. You know that as well as I do.
Mr Paradock
I understood we had. It's in the deeds.
Mrs Paradock
Is it?
Mr Paradock
I wouldn't have bought the house otherwise.
Mrs Paradock
House? This is a bungalow.
Mr Paradock
I wouldn't have bought it without looking pretty closely at the deeds to see if there was any mention of a garden.
Mrs Paradock
If you can find a garden in the deeds of this place you're welcome to take a turn in it.
There is a pause while Bro ponders this.
I should get up to bed if I were you.
88
Mr Paradock
Up to bed? I thought we were living in a bungalow?
Mrs Paradock
Look, Bro. I'm trying to help you. You're being very difficult and perverse and I'm trying very hard to be reasonable with you and understand you. Don't forget I'm just as drunk as you are underneath and I'm trying to fight it for both of us. You don't make it very easy for me, Bro.
Mr Paradock
I didn't know you were drunk too. I thought it was just me.
Mrs Paradock
You never do think it's ever possible for me to feel a bit blotto from time to time, Bro. You think you're the only one who takes a pull at the bottle occasionally.
Mr Paradock
I sometimes envy the man in the street who's never learned to drink for himself at all.
Mrs Paradock
It's no good getting cynical, Bro.
Mr Paradock
I do get cynical sometimes. The average man seems to be quite content to let the rest of us do all his drinking for him.
Mrs Paradock
That's true, Bro, but although he's spared a lot of the hangovers, don't forget that he misses the intoxication too.
Mr Paradock
Perhaps you're right, Middie, my dear.
Mrs Paradock
And now we must get out of here, Bro, because the producer wants it for his critics' meeting or something in a few minutes. So up you get.
She helps him out. Lights fade out.
Author's mouthpiece appears to right of set.
Author
It seemed the only way. I think we have all been trying as hard as can reasonably be expected not to show89our exasperation – I certainly have – because we do all like, naturally, to feel we've been provided with a meaning; something we can carry round with us like an umbrella for a few days. We all feel rather lost without a meaning to seize hold of; rather like a snake charmer in front of a boa constrictor and no flute. Or whatever they use. And in this search for a meaning we have some very good allies in the critics. They know a great deal about these things. They are trained to find meanings, and even if there are no meanings to be found they rarely come unprovided with spare meanings which with a little wire and string can often be fastened quite securely. So it is to the critics that for all our sakes I have decided to turn. We've got to turn somewhere. And what help I could have given you would have been worse than useless. I lay claim to no special vision and my own notions as to what it is I have in mind here may well fall pitifully short of your own far better notions. No. I am the dwarf in the circus – I give what scope I can to such deficiencies as I have. Beyond that, it is to these public servants of ours who guide us all to destinations (which even though they may not always amount to very much as destinations are nevertheless the best destinations we have), it is to the critics that we must commit ourselves. But for them we would be hard put to it to arrive anywhere at all. And it's the arriving somewhere which gives us the illusion that the journey has been worthwhile. No such illusion is likely to trouble any of us here, but perhaps we need not go home altogether empty-handed for all that – because here they are. Here is the first of the critics. This is, I need hardly tell you, a very welcome sight. I think we are shortly going to be led out of the wilderness. It's Mustard Short, you've probably recognised him, who has just taken his seat.
The critics as they arrive sit down round the table in the living room. Mustard Short is the first to arrive,90but is closely followed by Denzil Pepper, who takes a chair opposite him. When Miss Salt and Mrs Vinegar come in together they occupy the remaining seats, leaving a seat vacant at the head of the table for the Chairman.
It was Mustard Short, as you know, who last year – or was it earlier than that, in some previous incarnation perhaps? – who drew attention to some faults of structure in Tristram Shandy. And here is Denzil Pepper, carrying his high standards invisibly in brown paper, manoeuvring them clear of the light fittings and as ready devastatingly to unwrap them here as anywhere else. 'If this weren't in a bucket,' he roars, getting a lump of soap and plunging his hands into a bucket of sulphuric acid, 'if this weren't in a bucket, I should never have guessed it was meant to be water!' He's the boy. He's the one, if anybody can, who'll unmask the shadow. In a bloody froth of fulmination, too, unless he happens to have taken a sedative. Mrs Vinegar there – she's the woman in the black suit who has just sat down on the left of Mustard Short – looks, I must say, disconcertingly the worse for tedium. Miss Salt, on the other hand, is clearly ready to begin digging with indefatigable trowel among whatever unfruitful clods of dramatic earth she finds at her dedicated feet, and may, for all we can tell, come upon something which will surprise us all. And now let us alert the coastguards of our minds, for the Chairman has arrived. We must try now to assume receptive postures, and be ready to give asylum to such thoughts as are shortly to come among us.
Lights, except in the living room, fade.
Chairman
(standing) Shall we ask a blessing?
All stand.
For what we are now about to bestow may we be made truly worthy.
91
Miss Salt
I protest!
Pepper
I deplore!
Mustard
I condemn!
Mrs Vinegar
I denounce!
Miss Salt
I wish to go on record as having cringed.
Pepper
I wish to go on record as having writhed.
Mustard
I wish to go on record as having squirmed.
Mrs Vinegar
I wish to go on record as having suffered agony.
Miss Salt
I hail!
Pepper
I salute!
Mustard
I predict!
Mrs Vinegar
I acclaim!
All
(loudly and in unison) I wish to go on record! I wish to go on record! I wish to go on record!
They sit.
Chairman
We'll start at once with a discussion of the performance we have all been watching for the last hour or so, and we'll begin by deciding, if we can, what it is we have been present at, before going on to a consideration of its merits. Is this piece the bold experiment some people hold it to be? Is it a shameless plagiarism from the pen of a true primitive of the theatre – as someone has said – or is it neither of these things? Denzil Pepper – what do you make of this?
Pepper
This is a hotchpotch. I think that emerges quite clearly. The thing has been thrown together – a veritable ragbag of last year's damp fireworks, if a mixed metaphor is in order.
92
Miss Salt
Yes. I suppose it is what we must call a hotchpotch. I do think, though – accepting Denzil Pepper's definition – I do think, and this is the point I feel we ought to make, it is, surely, isn't it, an inspired hotchpotch?
Pepper
A hotchpotch de luxe. Only the finest ingredients. A theatrical haggis.
Chairman
Isn't this what our ancestors would have delighted in calling a gallimaufry?
Pause.
Mustard
'They have made our English tongue a gallimaufry or hodgepodge of all other speeches.' Yes. Spenser in the letter to Gabriel Harvey at the beginning of The Shepherd's Calendar. Yes. I'm not sure that I don't prefer the word 'gallimaufry' to Denzil Pepper's 'hodgepodge'.
Pepper
Hotchpotch. No. I stick, quite unrepentantly, to my own word.
Miss Salt
I'm wondering whether what Spenser was saying there was not referring to the language itself rather than to what was said in it? Words and phrases borrowed from other languages and so on? I think perhaps – and I say this under correction: I know Mustard Short is more familiar than I am about the attitude to this kind of thing in James Joyce – isn't this… haven't we got here an actual repudiation on the Joycean model of orderliness in a way the writers Spenser was attacking had not?
Pepper
I'm not at all happy about letting him get away with it on his own terms like that. After all, what happens when a boxer gets knocked out in the ring? He's lost the fight. It's as simple as that. He's lost the fight, and it makes no difference that his manager or someone announces through the loudspeaker afterwards that lying flat on his back was a deliberate repudiation of the vertical.
93
Mrs Vinegar
I couldn't agree more.
Chairman
Mrs Vinegar.
Mrs Vinegar
I was bored with this play. Or whatever it is. I was bored almost from the rise of the curtain with the characters – or is 'characters' too strong a word? – and I was even more bored by the situations they were put into.
Mustard
And the acting? Were you bored with the acting? I thought the cast carried it off for him exceptionally well.
Pepper
A splendid cast.
Mustard
Quite exceptionally well.
Miss Salt
It was in fact an actors' play.
Mustard
An actors' play and of course in a way a producer's play.
Chairman
How would Mrs Vinegar feel about calling this an actors' play?
Mrs Vinegar
No. No, I thought the acting was extremely good. The production I'm less sure about, but it was quite sound. As for this being an actors' play or a producer's play, whatever that may mean, I think fifth-rate play is the only sound designation for it. No amount of talent on the stage can make a fifth-rate play into a third-rate one, although it was quite obvious that that was what they were aiming at.
Chairman
Mustard Short. Were you bored by this play?
Mustard
Bored, no. Exasperated at times, yes. I did, I think, suppress a mild yawn twice, but I smiled occasionally, wondered what was coming next, got annoyed and irritated fairly frequently – in fact reacted much as one does in the theatre, except for experiencing tension. There was no tension and no tears. That I think94was a pity because with so much else there it would have been nice for the sake of completeness to have had those as well.
Mrs Vinegar
May I ask Mustard why, if he felt a genuine desire to yawn, he suppressed it?
Mustard
Politeness, I suppose – it's a vice we're all prone to in the theatre, where we could do with a lot less of it.
Miss Salt
If only to keep Aunt Edna in Surbiton.
Mrs Vinegar
The way to keep Aunt Edna or anybody else in Surbiton is to go on putting on plays like this one. And in that event I shall be in Surbiton too, I hope.
Chairman
We seem to be getting away from the play itself. Can we try to reach agreement on what kind of production this is? Is it a comedy? The play has a subtitle – The Accapictor Michmacted: a Comedy. Denzil Pepper – what do you think about this play as a comedy?
Pepper
What do I think about it as a comedy? I believe I laughed once. So, technically, I suppose the play could be called a comedy.
Mrs Vinegar
As a matter of curiosity – what was it Denzil Pepper laughed at?
Pepper
I really can't remember what it was.
Mustard
Perhaps calling it a comedy is part of the comedy?
Pepper
Perhaps so. If someone had told me that, I would certainly have done what I could to laugh. But that's just what I'm never quite sure about – what is it we're being asked to do here? Are we being asked to laugh at him, laugh with him – or are we meant, God forbid, to take him seriously?
95
Mustard
It's satire, surely.
Miss Salt
What was it Swift called satire? A mirror, wasn't it, in which a man sees any face but his own. It's certainly very true here.
Mustard
'Satire is a sort of glass, wherein beholders do generally discover everybody's face but their own.'
Pepper
I would have been delighted to have caught a glimpse even of my own face!
Miss Salt
Oh, the face was there. It was impossible at times to identify it, even to distinguish it – it will take a careful reading and re-reading of the play to do that – but the face was there. Of that I'm quite certain.
Chairman
Did you, Mustard Short, discover a face you could recognise?
Mustard
None, I'm afraid. None whatever.
Miss Salt
A contorted face, perhaps? I thought I saw that. The human face. In the human predicament. Contorted with grief? With pain?
Mrs Vinegar
With boredom.
Mustard
Could he, I wonder, be satirising satire?
Chairman
A skit on satire itself. How does that strike you, Miss Salt?
Miss Salt
Yes. Yes, I think it very likely. I'm wondering whether perhaps rather than 'skit' the word 'parody' would hit off better what it is he's trying for here. Could he be parodying the whole thing? The whole concept? A parody of a skit, if that's possible.
Pepper
If this is a parody of a skit at all, it must be a parody of a skit on something.
96
Mustard
A parody of a skit on satire?
Pepper
For a sophisticated audience. It goes without saying that it's a sophisticated audience he's got in mind here. I take it that's agreed.
Mustard
A sophisticated audience.
Mrs Vinegar
A sophisticated audience flagging.
Mustard
No. I think, if I may say so, Mrs Vinegar is being rather too uncompromisingly hostile to what is – let us be as fair as we possibly can about it – to what is by any standards a remarkable… a remarkable phenomenon.
Miss Salt
I'd rather like to take up this idea of the skit again, or the parody of it, because – and this is surely the whole point which none of us has made yet – here is a play in which the writer is imitating himself repeatedly all through the play. He is in fact actually burlesquing his own self-mimicry and in quite the most devastating way from first to last. That I think is inherent in the whole thing.
Pepper
He's satirising farce, of course, too. That comes across quite unmistakably. As one of the characters says somewhere in the play – this is the custard-pie farce of the intellect.
Mustard
Comedy. Custard-pie comedy. Of the abstract. But to get back to this point about burlesque. It is, basically, a parody of a skit on satire that he's burlesquing, and the farce is so to speak a by-product of that. I don't think he's aiming at farce at all. The farce is in a sense what we, the audience, contribute.
Chairman
The audience. Did anyone else, I wonder, feel – as I certainly did – that the barrier between audience and actors was being quite deliberately dismantled? Mrs Vinegar?
97
Mrs Vinegar
It's been done before. And done better.
Mustard
You mean the Verfremdungseffekt. The alienation effect.
Miss Salt
It's Brecht, of course – though with a very different aim from that of Brecht.
Pepper
No. I don't see Brecht here at all.
Miss Salt
It's the Brechtian technique carried on beyond Brecht. Isn't that it?
Mustard
Beyond, and in a sense of course at a tangent to Brecht. It's as though he'd gone off on a branch line some way back which is carrying him further than Brecht was able to go but in a quite different direction.
Miss Salt
And, of course, facing Brecht as he moves away from him. The farther he goes beyond Brecht, therefore, the farther he is retreating from him.
Pepper
I can accept Brecht as starting point. But a starting point is something you move away from, and in my view the author of this play has been doing just that. He has been putting more and more ground between himself and his model – if that's what Brecht is, though I doubt it – and they have been getting farther and farther apart, these two, until both of them are specks on the horizon. Which is why I think we're quite wrong to be discussing this play or whatever it is as if it were The Comedy of Errors rewritten by Lewis Carroll to provide a part for Godot or somebody.
Chairman
Yes. Well, now our time is running out and I think we ought to say something about the ending – which we've none of us yet seen of course. Is it possible that some of the shortcomings of the play so far could be redeemed by the ending? Mrs Vinegar?
98
Mrs Vinegar
I doubt whether I could sit through any more of it. I have never begrudged danger money to steeplejacks and people of that kind, and I do think it's high time someone suggested boredom money for critics. The ending? No. I think the piece is beyond redemption. The best that can be hoped for from the ending is that sooner or later it will arrive.
Chairman
Denzil Pepper. What do you think about the ending?
Pepper
I think it's the Russians, isn't it, who have a proverb to the effect that if you can't hold a horse by the mane, you'll never hold it by the tail?
Pause.
Mustard
You can count all the same on being dragged a reasonable distance before having to let go.
Pepper
Possibly. I'm not sure, though, that I want to do my travelling at the tail of a runaway horse.
Mrs Vinegar
Is it travelling along the road of life we're talking about? Because as far as that journey is concerned, I broke the back of it this evening during the first act.
Chairman
And that I'm afraid will have to end the discussion if not the play, because our time is up. I'm sorry to have to apply the guillotine to a discussion which has been so lively – I think we've rarely had a livelier discussion of any play. And a play which can stimulate as much strong feeling, or even boredom –
Laughter.
– is something we can always do with in the theatre. I'm sure we would all of us agree, whatever our individual reactions to it may have been, that we have here a play the real author of which will not be born for many years to come.
99
All
Hear, hear.
The light in the living room fades. A half-light reveals the Author's mouthpiece, who is sitting on a chair staring ahead with a quite blank expression. He starts convulsively, stands up and looks, with no change of expression, towards the audience. As the lights come up in the living room, revealing Bro Paradock sitting with a newspaper before him, the Author's mouthpiece glances quickly in that direction, and then goes slowly out as though dazed.
The scene is exactly the same as in Act One, Scene One. Middie Paradock comes into the room and begins tidying it, speaking as she does so.
Mrs Paradock
There's somebody at the door wanting you to form a government.
Mr Paradock
When?
Mrs Paradock
He says he's working through the street directory. He's waiting outside now.
Mr Paradock
What does he look like?
Mrs Paradock
In an old raincoat. He's probably trying it on. I shall want this cork opened in case we have to offer him a drink.
Mr Paradock
It's nectar if it's anything. Not ambrosia.
Mrs Paradock
He won't be able to tell the difference.
Mr Paradock
If he can't tell the difference between ambrosia and nectar he shouldn't be wearing an old raincoat.
Mrs Paradock
He's only trying it on for size. I got that much out of him.
Mr Paradock
In that case what does he want me to form a government for?
100
Mrs Paradock
I should have thought that was obvious.
Mr Paradock
Supposing it turns out to be Uncle Ted having a joke?
Mrs Paradock
You know as well as I do Uncle Ted hasn't got a sense of humour any longer.
Mr Paradock
He may think I look like Gladstone.
Mrs Paradock
What if he does? You've got a good many years in front of you yet.
Mr Paradock
Don't start on that, Middie, please.
Mrs Paradock
You're in your prime.
Mr Paradock
Middie!
Mrs Paradock
A man with your constitution at your time of life is in for a good long spell of it yet.
Mr Paradock
Can't you leave me alone, Middie? Can't you keep quiet about it?
Mrs Paradock
You're as fit as you've ever been.
Mr Paradock
Stop baiting me, Middie! Just shut up about being in my prime. You only keep on about it because you know it plays merry hell with my death wish!
Blackout. Enter, in front of living room set, a Man In A Bowler Hat carrying a manuscript case.
Man in Bowler Hat
Who's in charge here? Where's the producer or somebody?
Enter Producer from right.
They've had about as much as they can take of this out there. (To audience.) I don't know how you feel about my breaking in on the production like this, but – (To Producer.) I think we've all had about enough.
101
Producer
You think the curtain ought to come down, sir?
Man in Bowler Hat
It's unpleasant for everyone when an audience begins to get restive. (To audience.) I know that only too well from an experience of my own when I was foolish enough on one occasion to consent to act as chairman at a political meeting, of all things. The member was speaking – or rather not the member, because as it turned out he lost his deposit – but the candidate, as he was then, was speaking at the time and some unruly elements…
Enter from right Author in high spirits.
Author
Well. What a waste of talent it's all been! What a waste!
Man in Bowler Hat
(in sotto voce panic) Pas devant les auditeurs!
Author
Les auditeurs. I must say they've all for the most part taken insult after insult in a splendid spirit. Don't you think so?
Producer
They've taken it very well. But I think perhaps we ought to try and get the curtain down. They'll be wanting to get away.
Author
I'll have a little chat with them. Take Henry Irving with you and get working on the curtain – it's probably jammed.
Producer and Man In Bowler Hat go out right.
It's been an odd evening to say the least of it. I don't quite know whether it would be arrogant of me to take the blame on the grounds that it was I who initiated it all – or whether perhaps we ought all to share bouquets and brickbats promiscuously among us. My own contribution probably seems more important than it is because, as I say, it was my small contribution which set it all going,102as it were – and yet, if it comes to that, which of you with a shot or two of benzedrine couldn't have done as well or better? But there is an important point which may be overlooked unless I draw attention to it now and it's this: the retreat from reason means precious little to anyone who has never caught up with reason in the first place. It takes a trained mind to relish a non sequitur. So you can take comfort from that. And now one last thing. This is a delicate subject to broach but… we on this side of the footlights feel that some gesture from us would be more than appropriate in view of… of your forbearance, but on the other hand we felt that anything we might do by way of applauding the audience would seem somehow to smack if not of affectation at any rate of… the unconventional? We don't want to fly in the face of tradition but…
Lights come up in the living room set where the cast is assembled. Each holds a glass of a bright, purple liquid ready to respond to a toast.
The audience!
All
The audience!
They drink.
Curtain.
W:
More.
Pause. Rock and voice together.
V:
till in the end the day came
in the end came
close of a long day
when she said
to herself
whom else
time she stopped
time she stopped
going to and fro
all eyes
all sides
high and low
for another
another like herself
another creature like herself
a little like
going to and fro
all eyes
all sides
high and low
for another 128till in the end
close of a long day
to herself
whom else
time she stopped
time she stopped
going to and fro
all eyes
all sides
high and low
for another
another living soul
going to and fro
all eyes like herself
all sides
high and low
for another
another like herself
a little like
going to and fro
till in the end
close of a long day
to herself
whom else
time she stopped
going to and fro
time she stopped
time she stopped
Together: echo of 'time she stopped', coming to rest of rock, faint fade of light. Long pause.
W:
More.
Pause. Rock and voice together.
V:
so in the end close of a long day
went back in 129in the end went back in
saying to herself
whom else
time she stopped
time she stopped
going to and fro
time she went and sat
at her window
quiet at her window
facing other windows
so in the end
close of a long day
in the end went and sat
went back in and sat
at her window
let up the blind and sat
quiet at her window
only window
facing other windows
other only windows
all eyes
all sides
high and low
for another
at her window
another like herself
a little like
another living soul
one other living soul
at her window
gone in like herself
gone back in
in the end
close of a long day
saying to herself
whom else 130time she stopped
time she stopped
going to and fro
time she went and sat
at her window
quiet at her window
only window
facing other windows
other only windows
all eyes
all sides
high and low
for another
another like herself
a little like
another living soul
one other living soul
Together: echo of 'living soul', coming to rest of rock, faint fade of light. Long pause.
W:
More.
Pause. Rock and voice together.
V:
till in the end the day came
in the end came
close of a long day
sitting at her window
quiet at her window
only window
facing other windows
other only windows
all blinds down
never one up
hers alone up
till the day came
in the end came 131close of a long day
sitting at her window
quiet at her window
all eyes
all sides
high and low
for a blind up
one blind up
no more
never mind a face
behind the pane
famished eyes
like hers
to see
be seen
no
a blind up
like hers
a little like
one blind up no more
another creature there
somewhere there
behind the pane
another living soul
one other living soul
till the day came
in the end came
close of a long day
when she said
to herself
whom else
time she stopped
time she stopped
sitting at her window
quiet at her window
only window 132facing other windows
other only windows
all eyes
all sides
high and low
time she stopped
time she stopped
Together: echo of 'time she stopped', coming to rest of rock, faint fade of light. Long pause.
W:
More.
Pause. Rock and voice together.
V:
so in the end close of a long day
went down
in the end went down
down the steep stair
let down the blind and down
right down
into the old rocker
mother rocker
where mother rocked
all the years
all in black
best black
sat and rocked
rocked
till her end came
in the end came
off her head they said
gone off her head
but harmless
no harm in her
dead one day
no
night 133dead one night
in the rocker
in her best black
head fallen
and the rocker rocking
rocking away
so in the end
close of a long day
went down
in the end went down
down the steep stair
let down the blind and down
right down
into the old rocker
those arms at last
and rocked
rocked
with closed eyes
closing eyes
she so long all eyes
famished eyes
all sides
high and low
to and fro
at her window
to see
be seen
till in the end
close of a long day
to herself
whom else
time she stopped
let down the blind and stopped
time she went down
down the steep stair
time she went right down 134was her own other
own other living soul
so in the end
close of a long day
went down
let down the blind and down
right down
into the old rocker
and rocked
rocked
saying to herself
no
done with that
the rocker
those arms at last
saying to the rocker
rock her off
stop her eyes
fuck life
stop her eyes
rock her off
rock her off
Together: echo of 'rock her off', coming to rest of rock, slow fade out.
Street corner. Ruins.
A, blind, sitting on a folding-stool, scrapes his fiddle. Beside him the case, half open, upended, surmounted by alms bowl. He stops playing, turns his head audience right, listens.
Pause.
A
A penny for a poor old man, a penny for a poor old man. (Silence. He resumes playing, stops again, turns his head right, listens. Enter B1 right, in a wheelchair which he propels by means of a pole. He halts. Irritated.) A penny for a poor old man!
Pause.
B
Music! (Pause.) So it is not a dream. At last! Nor a vision, they are mute and I am mute before them. (He advances, halts, looks into bowl. Without emotion.) Poor wretch. (Pause.) Now I may go back, the mystery is over. (He pushes himself backwards, halts.) Unless we join together, and live together, till death ensue. (Pause.) What would you say to that, Billy, may I call you Billy, like my son? (Pause.) Do you like company, Billy? (Pause.) Do you like tinned food, Billy?
A
What tinned food?
B
Corned beef, Billy, just corned beef. Enough to keep body and soul together, till summer, with care. (Pause.) No? (Pause.) A few potatoes too, a few pounds of potatoes too. (Pause.) Do you like potatoes, Billy? (Pause.) We might even let them sprout and then, when the time came, put them in the ground, we might even try that. (Pause.) I would choose the place and you would put them in the ground. (Pause.) No? (Pause.)
16
A
How are the trees doing?
B
Hard to say. It's winter, you know.
Pause.
A
Is it day or night?
B
Oh… (he looks at the sky) …day, if you like. No sun of course, otherwise you wouldn't have asked. (Pause.) Do you follow my reasoning? (Pause.) Have you your wits about you, Billy, have you still some of your wits about you?
A
But light?
B
Yes. (Looks at sky.) Yes, light, there is no other word for it. (Pause.) Shall I describe it to you? (Pause.) Shall I try to give you an idea of this light?
A
It seems to me sometimes I spend the night here, playing and listening. I used to feel twilight gather and make myself ready. I put away fiddle and bowl and had only to get to my feet, when she took me by the hand.
Pause.
B
She?
A
My woman. (Pause.) A woman. (Pause.) But now…
Pause.
B
Now?
A
When I set out I don't know, and when I get here I don't know, and while I am here I don't know, whether it is day or night.
B
You were not always as you are. What befell you? Women? Gambling? God?
A
I was always as I am.
B
Come!
A
(Violently.) I was always as I am, crouched in the dark, scratching an old jangle to the four winds!
B
(Violently.) We had our women, hadn't we? You yours to lead you by the hand and I mine to get me out of the chair in the evening and back into it again in the morning and to push me as far as the corner when I went out of my mind.
17
A
Cripple? (Without emotion.) Poor wretch.
B
Only one problem: the about-turn. I often felt, as I struggled, that it would be quicker to go on, right round the world. Till the day I realised I could go home backwards. (Pause.)
For example, I am at A. (He pushes himself forward a little, halts.) I push on to B. (He pushes himself back a little, halts.) And I return to A. (With élan.) The straight line! The vacant space! (Pause.) Do I begin to move you?
A
Sometimes I hear steps. Voices. I say to myself,They are coming back, some are coming back, to try and settle again, or to look for something they had left behind, or to look for someone they had left behind.
B
Come back! (Pause.) Who would want to come back here? (Pause.) And you never called out? (Pause.) Cried out? (Pause.) No?
A
Have you observed nothing?
B
Oh me you know, observe… I sit there, in my lair, in my chair, in the dark, twenty-three hours out of the twenty-four. (Violently.) What would you have me observe? (Pause.) Do you think we would make a match, now you are getting to know me?
A
Corned beef, did you say?
B
Apropos, what have you been living on, all this time? You must be famished.
A
There are things lying around.
B
Edible?
A
Sometimes.
B
Why don't you let yourself die?
A
On the whole I have been lucky.The other day I tripped over a sack of nuts.
B
No!
A
A little sack, full of nuts, in the middle of the road.
B
Yes, all right, but why don't you let yourself die?
A
I have thought of it.
B
(Irritated.) But you don't do it!
18
A
I'm not unhappy enough. (Pause.) That was always my unhap, unhappy, but not unhappy enough.
B
But you must be every day a little more so.
A
(Violently.) I am not unhappy enough!
Pause.
B
If you ask me we were made for each other.
A
(Comprehensive gesture.) What does it all look like now?
B
Oh me you know… I never go far, just a little up and down before my door. I never yet pushed on to here till now.
A
But you look about you?
B
No no.
A
After all those hours of darkness you don't—
B
(Violently.) No! (Pause.) Of course if you wish me to look about me I shall. And if you care to push me about I shall try to describe the scene, as we go along.
A
You mean you would guide me? I wouldn't get lost any more?
B
Exactly. I would say, Easy, Billy, we're heading for a great muckheap, turn back and wheel left when I give you the word.
A
You'd do that!
B
(Pressing his advantage.) Easy, Billy, easy, I see a round tin over there in the gutter, perhaps it's soup, or baked beans.
A
Baked beans!
Pause.
B
Are you beginning to like me? (Pause.) Or is it only my imagination?
A
Baked beans! (He gets up, puts down fiddle and bowl on the stool and gropes towards B.) Where are you?
B
Here, dear fellow. (A lays hold of the chair and starts pushing it blindly.) Stop!
A
(Pushing the chair.) It's a gift! A gift!
B
Stop! (He strikes behind him with the pole. A lets go the chair, recoils. Pause. A gropes towards his stool, halts, lost.) Forgive me! (Pause.) Forgive me, Billy!
19
A
Where am I? (Pause.) Where was I?
B
Now I've lost him. He was beginning to like me and I struck him. He'll leave me and I'll never see him again. I'll never see anyone again. We'll never hear the human voice again.
A
Have you not heard it enough? The same old moans and groans from the cradle to the grave.
B
(Groaning.) Do something for me, before you go!
A
There! Do you hear it? (Pause. Groaning.) I can't go! (Pause.) Do you hear it?
B
You can't go?
A
I can't go without my things.
B
What good are they to you?
A
None.
B
And you can't go without them?
A
No. (He starts groping again, halts.) I'll find them in the end. (Pause.) Or leave them for ever behind me.
He starts groping again.
B
Straighten my rug, I feel the cold air on my foot. (A halts.) I'd do it myself, but it would take too long. (Pause.) Do that for me, Billy. Then I may go back, settle in the old nook again and say, I have seen man for the last time, I struck him and he succoured me. (Pause.) Find a few rags of love in my heart and die reconciled, with my species. (Pause.) What has you gaping at me like that? (Pause.) Have I said something I shouldn't have? (Pause.) What does my soul look like?
A gropes towards him.
A
Make a sound.
B makes one. A gropes towards it, halts.
B
Have you no sense of smell either?
A
It's the same stink everywhere. (He stretches out his hand.) Am I within reach of your hand?
He stands motionless with outstretched hand.
B
Wait, you're not going to do me a service for nothing? (Pause.) I mean unconditionally? (Pause.) Good God! 20(Pause. He takes A's hand and draws it towards him.)
A
Your foot.
B
What?
A
You said your foot.
B
Had I but known! (Pause.) Yes, my foot, tuck it in. (A stoops, groping.) On your knees, on your knees, you'll be more at your ease. (He helps him to kneel at the right place.) There.
A
(Irritated.) Let go my hand! You want me to help you and you hold my hand! (B lets go his hand. A fumbles in the rug.) Have you only one leg?
B
Just the one.
A
And the other?
B
It went bad and was removed.
A tucks in the foot.
A
Will that do?
B
A little tighter. (A tucks in tighter.) What hands you have! (Pause.)
A
(Groping towards B's torso.) Is all the rest there?
B
You may stand up now and ask me a favour.
A
Is all the rest there?
B
Nothing else has been removed, if that is what you mean. (A's hand, groping higher, reaches the face, stays.)
A
Is that your face?
B
I confess it is. (Pause.) What else could it be? (A's fingers stray, stay.) That? My wen.
A
Red?
B
Purple. (A withdraws his hand, remains kneeling.) What hands you have!
Pause.
A
Is it still day?
B
Day? (Looks at sky.) If you like. (Looks.) There is no other word for it.
A
Will it not soon be evening?
B stoops to A, shakes him.
B
Come, Billy, get up, you're beginning to incommode me.
A
Will it not soon be night?
21
B looks at sky.
B
Day… night… (Looks.) It seems to me sometimes the earth must have got stuck, one sunless day, in the heart of winter, in the grey of evening. (Stoops to A, shakes him.) Come on, Billy, up, you're beginning to embarrass me.
A
Is there grass anywhere?
B
I see none.
A
(Vehement.) Is there no green anywhere?
B
There's a little moss. (Pause. A clasps his hands on the rug and rests his head on them.) Good God! Don't tell me you're going to pray?
A
No.
B
Or weep?
A
No. (Pause.) I could stay like that for ever, with my head on an old man's knees.
B
Knee. (Shaking him roughly.) Get up, can't you!
A
(Settling himself more comfortably.) What peace! (B pushes him roughly away, A falls to his hands and knees.) Dora used to say, the days I hadn't earned enough, You and your harp! You'd do better crawling on all fours, with your father's medals pinned to your arse and a money box round your neck. You and your harp! Who do you think you are? And she made me sleep on the floor. (Pause.) Who I thought I was… (Pause.) Ah that… I never could… (Pause. He gets up.) Never could… (He starts groping again for his stool, halts, listens.) If I listened long enough I'd hear it, a string would give.
B
Your harp? (Pause.) What's all this about a harp?
A
I once had a little harp. Be still and let me listen. (Pause.)
B
How long are you going to stay like that?
A
I can stay for hours listening to all the sounds. (They listen.)
B
What sounds?
A
I don't know what they are.
They listen.
22
B
I can see it. (Pause.) I can—
A
(Imploring.) Will you not be still?
B
No! (A takes his head in his hands.) I can see it clearly, over there on the stool. (Pause.) What if I took it, Billy, and made off with it? (Pause.) Eh Billy, what would you say to that? (Pause.) There might be another old man, some day, would come out of his hole and find you playing the mouth-organ. And you'd tell him of the little fiddle you once had. (Pause.) Eh Billy? (Pause.) Or singing. (Pause.) Eh Billy, what would you say to that? (Pause.) There croaking to the winter wind (rime with unkind) , having lost his little mouth-organ. (He pokes him in the back with the pole.) Eh Billy? (A whirls round, seizes the end of the pole and wrenches it from B's grasp.)
B
Well!
A
Hsst! Switch off. (B switches off. Long pause. Low.) What a night! (Long pause. Musing.) I still don't understand. (Pause.) Why he needs our services. (Pause.) A man like him. (Pause.) And why we give them free. (Pause.) Men like us. (Pause.) Mystery. (Pause.) Ah well… (Pause. He switches on.) Shall we go? (B switches on, rummages in his papers.) The crux. (B rummages.) We sum up and clear out. (B rummages.) Set to go?
B
Rearing.
A
We attend.
26
B
Let him jump.
A
When?
B
Now.
A
From where?
B
From here will do. Three to three and a half metres per floor, say twenty-five in all.
Pause.
A
I could have sworn we were only on the sixth. (Pause.) He runs no risk?
B
He has only to land on his arse, the way he lived. The spine snaps and the tripes explode.
Pause. A gets up, goes to the window, leans out, looks down. He straightens up, looks at the sky. Pause. He goes back to his seat.
A
Full moon.
B
Not quite. Tomorrow.
A takes a little diary from his pocket.
A
What's the date?
B
Twenty-fourth. Twenty-fifth tomorrow.
A
(Turning pages.) Nineteen… twenty-two… twenty-four. (Reads.) 'Our Lady of Succour. Full moon.' (He puts back the diary in his pocket.) We were saying then… what was it… let him jump. Our conclusion. Right?
B
Work, family, third fatherland, cunt, finances, art and nature, heart and conscience, health, housing conditions, God and man, so many disasters.
Pause.
A
(Meditative.) Does it follow? (Pause.) Does it follow? (Pause.) And his sense of humour? Of proportion?
B
Swamped.
Pause.
A
May we not be mistaken?
B
(Indignant.) We have been to the best sources. All weighed and weighed again, checked and verified. Not a word here (brandishing sheaf of papers) that is not cast iron. Tied together like a cathedral. (He flings down the papers on the table. They scatter on the floor.) Shit!
27
He picks them up. A raises his lamp and shines it about him.
A
Seen worse dumps. (Turning towards window.) Worse outlooks. (Pause.) Is that Jupiter we see?
Pause.
B
Where?
A
Switch off. (They switch off.) It must be.
B
(Irritated.) Where?
A
(Irritated.) There. (B cranes.) There, on the right, in the corner.
Pause.
B
No. It twinkles.
A
What is it then?
B
(Indifferent.) No idea. Sirius. (He switches on.) Well? Do we work or play? (A switches on.) You forget this is not his home. He's only here to take care of the cat. At the end of the month shoosh back to the barge. (Pause. Louder.) You forget this is not his home.
A
(Irritated.) I forget, I forget! And he, does he not forget? (With passion.) But that's what saves us!
B
(Searching through his papers.) Memory… memory… (He takes up a sheet.) I quote: 'An elephant's for the eating cares, a sparrow's for the Lydian airs.' Testimony of Mr Swell, organist at Seaton Sluice and lifelong friend.
Pause.
A
(Glum.) Tsstss!
B
I quote: 'Questioned on this occasion' —open brackets—'(judicial separation)' —close brackets—'regarding the deterioration of our relations, all he could adduce was the five or six miscarriages which clouded' —open brackets—'(oh through no act of mine!)' —close brackets—'the early days of our union and the veto which in consequence I had finally to oppose' —open brackets—'(oh not for want of inclination!)' —close brackets—'to anything remotely resembling the work of love. But on the subject of our happiness' —open brackets—'(for it too came our way, unavoidably, and here my mind goes back to the first vows 28exchanged at Wootton Bassett under the bastard acacias, or again to the first fifteen minutes of our wedding night at Littlestone-on-Sea, or yet again to those first long studious evenings in our nest on Commercial Road East)' —close brackets—'on the subject of our happiness not a word, Sir, not one word.' Testimony of Mrs Aspasia Budd-Croker, button designer in residence, Commercial Road East.
A
(Glum.) Tsstss!
B
I quote again: 'Of our national epos he remembered only the calamities, which did not prevent him from winning a minor scholarship in the subject.' Testimony of Mr Peaberry, market gardener in the Deeping Fens and lifelong friend. (Pause.) 'Not a tear was known to fall in our family, and God knows they did in torrents, that was not caught up and piously preserved in that inexhaustible reservoir of sorrow, with the date, the hour and the occasion, and not a joy, fortunately they were few, that was not on the contrary irrevocably dissolved, as by a corrosive. In that he took after me.' Testimony of the late Mrs Darcy-Croker, woman of letters. (Pause.) Care for more?
A
Enough.
B
I quote: 'To hear him talk about his life, after a glass or two, you would have thought he had never set foot outside hell. He had us in stitches. I worked it up into a skit that went down well.' Testimony of Mr Moore, light comedian, c/o Widow Merryweather-Moore, All Saints on the Wash, and lifelong friend.
Pause.
A
(Stricken.) Tsstss! (Pause.) Tsstsstss!
B
You see. (Emphatic.) This is not his home and he knows it full well.
Pause.
A
Now let's have the positive elements.
B
Positive? You mean of a nature to make him think… (hesitates, then with sudden violence) …that some day 29things might change? Is that what you want? (Pause. Calmer.) There are none.
A
(Wearily.) Oh yes there are, that's the beauty of it. (Pause. B rummages in his papers.)
B
(Looking up.) Forgive me, Bertrand. (Pause. Rummages. Looks up.) I don't know what came over me.
(Pause. Rummages. Looks up.) A moment of consternation.
(Pause. Rummages.) There is that incident of the lottery… possibly. Remember?
A
No.
B
(Reading.) 'Two hundred lots… winner receives high class watch… solid gold, hallmark nineteen carats, marvel of accuracy, showing year, month, date, day, hour, minute and second, super chic, unbreakable hair spring, chrono escapement nineteen rubies, anti-shock, anti-magnetic, airtight, waterproof, stainless, self-winding, centre seconds hand, Swiss parts, de luxe lizard band.'
A
What did I tell you? However unhopefully.The mere fact of chancing his luck. I knew he had a spark left in him.
B
The trouble is he didn't procure it himself. It was a gift. That you forget.
A
(Irritated.) I forget, I forget! And he, does he not—(Pause.) At least he kept it.
B
If you can call it that.
A
At least he accepted it. (Pause.) At least he didn't refuse it.
B
I quote: 'The last time I laid eyes on him I was on my way to the Post Office to cash an order for back-pay. The area before the building is shut off by a row of bollards with chains hung between them. He was seated on one of these with his back to the Thompson works. To all appearances down and out. He sat doubled in two, his hands on his knees, his legs astraddle, his head sunk. For a moment I wondered if he was not vomiting. But on drawing nearer I could see he was merely scrutinising, between his feet, a lump of dogshit. I moved it slightly with the tip of my umbrella and observed how his gaze followed the 30movement and fastened on the object in its new position. This at three o'clock in the afternoon if you please! I confess I had not the heart to bid him the time of day, I was overcome. I simply slipped into his hip pocket a lottery ticket I had no use for, while silently wishing him the best of luck. When two hours later I emerged from the Post Office, having cashed my order, he was at the same place and in the same attitude. I sometimes wonder if he is still alive.' Testimony of Mr Feckman, certified accountant and friend for better and for worse.
Pause.
A
Dated when?
B
Recent.
A
It has such a bygone ring. (Pause.) Nothing else?
B
Oh… bits and scraps… good graces of an heirless aunt… unfinished—
A
Hairless aunt?
B
…heirless aunt… unfinished game of chess with a correspondent in Tasmania… hope not dead of living to see the extermination of the species… literary aspirations incompletely stifled… bottom of a dairy-woman in Waterloo Lane… you see the kind of thing.
Pause.
A
We pack up this evening, right?
B
Without fail. Tomorrow we're at Bury St Edmunds.
A
(Sadly.) We'll leave him none the wiser. We'll leave him now, never to meet again, having added nothing to what he knew already.
B
All these testimonies were new to him. They will have finished him off.
A
Not necessarily. (Pause.) Any light on that? (Papers.) This is vital. (Papers.) Something… I seem to remember… something… he said himself.
B
(Papers.) Under 'Confidences' then. (Brief laugh.) Slim file. (Papers.) Confidences… confidences… ah!
A
(Impatient.) Well?
31
B
(Reading.) '… sick headaches… eye trouble… irrational fear of vipers… ear trouble…' —nothing for us there—'… fibroid tumours… pathological horror of songbirds… throat trouble… need of affection…' —we're coming to it—'… inner void… congenital timidity… nose trouble…' —ah! listen to this!—'… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others…' (Looks up.) What did I tell you?
A
(Glum.) Tsstss!
B
I'll read the whole passage: '… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others—' (His lamp goes out.) Well! The bulb has blown! (The lamp goes on again.) No, it hasn't! Must be a faulty connection. (Examines lamp, straightens flex.) The flex was twisted, now all is well. (Reading.) '… morbidly sensitive—' (The lamp goes out.) Bugger and shit!
A
Try giving her a shake. (B shakes the lamp. It goes on again.) See! I picked up that wrinkle in the Band of Hope. (Pause.)
B
(Together.) '… morbidly sensitive—'
A
Keep your hands off the table.
B
What?
A
Keep your hands off the table. If it's a connection the least jog can do it.
B
(Having pulled back his chair a little way.) '… morbidly sensitive—'
The lamp goes out. B bangs on the table with his fist. The lamp goes on again. Pause.
A
Mysterious affair, electricity.
B
(Hurriedly.) '… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others at the time, I mean as often and for as long as they entered my awareness—' What kind of Chinese is that?
A
(Nervously.) Keep going, keep going!
B
'… for as long as they entered my awareness, and that in either case, I mean whether such on the one hand as to give me pleasure or on the contrary on the other to cause me pain, and truth to tell—' Shit! Where's the verb?
32
A
What verb?
B
The main!
A
I give up.
B
Hold on till I find the verb and to hell with all this drivel in the middle. (Reading.) '… were I but… could I but…' —Jesus!—'… though it be… be it but…' —Christ!— ah! I have it—'… I was unfortunately incapable…' Done it!
A
How does it run now?
B
(Solemnly.) '… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others at the time…' —drivel drivel drivel—'… I was unfortunately incapable—'
The lamp goes out. Long pause.
A
Would you care to change seats? (Pause.) You see what I mean? (Pause.) That you come over here with your papers and I go over there. (Pause.) Don't whinge, Morvan, that will get us nowhere.
B
It's my nerves. (Pause.) Ah if I were only twenty years younger I'd put an end to my sufferings!
A
Fie! Never say such horrid things! Even to a well-wisher!
B
May I come to you? (Pause.) I need animal warmth.
Pause.
A
(Coldly.) As you like. (B gets up and goes towards A.) With your files if you don't mind. (B goes back for papers and briefcase, returns towards A, puts them on A's table, remains standing. Pause.) Do you want me to take you on my knees?
Pause. B goes back for his chair, returns towards A, stops before A's table with the chair in his arms. Pause.
B
(Shyly.) May I sit beside you? (They look at each other.) No? (Pause.) Then opposite. (He sits down opposite A, looks at him. Pause.) Do we continue?
A
(Forcibly.) Let's get it over and go to bed.
B rummages in his papers.
B
I'll take the lamp. (He draws it towards him.) Please God it holds out. What would we do in the dark the pair of us? 33(Pause.) Have you matches?
A
Never without. (Pause.) What we would do? Go and stand by the window in the starlight. (B's lamp goes on again.) That is to say you would.
B
(Fervently.) Oh no not alone I wouldn't!
A
Pass me a sheet. (B passes him a sheet.) Switch off. (B switches off.) Oh lord, yours is on again.
B
This gag has gone on long enough for me.
A
Just so. Go and switch it off.
B goes to his table, switches off his lamp. Pause.
B
What am I to do now? Switch it on again?
A
Come back.
B
Switch on then till I see where I'm going.
A switches on. B goes back and sits down opposite A. A switches off, goes to window with sheet, halts, contemplates the sky.
A
And to think all that is nuclear combustion! All that faerie! (He stoops over sheet and reads haltingly.) 'Aged ten, runs away from home first time, brought back next day, admonished, forgiven.' (Pause.) 'Aged fifteen, runs away from home second time, dragged back a week later, thrashed, forgiven.' (Pause.) 'Aged seventeen, runs away from home third time, slinks back six months later with his tail between his legs, locked up, forgiven.' (Pause.) 'Aged seventeen runs away from home last time, crawls back a year later on his hands and knees, kicked out, forgiven.'
Pause. He moves up against window to inspect C's face, to do which he has to lean out a little way, with his back to the void.
B
Careful!
Long pause, all three dead still.
A
(Sadly.) Tsstss! (He resumes his equilibrium.) Switch on. (B switches on. A goes back to his table, sits, returns the sheet to B.) It's heavy going, but we're nearly home.
B
How does he look?
34
A
Not at his best.
B
Has he still got that little smile on his face?
A
Probably.
B
What do you mean, probably, haven't you just been looking at him?
A
He didn't have it then.
B
(With satisfaction.) Ah! (Pause.) Could never make out what he thought he was doing with that smile on his face. And his eyes? Still goggling?
A
Shut.
B
Shut!
A
Oh it was only so as not to see me. He must have opened them again since. (Pause. Violently.) You'd need to stare them in the face day and night! Never take your eyes off them for a week on end! Unbeknownst to them! (Pause.)
B
Looks to me we have him.
A
(Impatiently.) Come on, we're getting nowhere, get on with it.
B rummages in his papers, finds the sheet.
B
(Reading at top speed.) '… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others at the time…' —drivel drivel drivel—'… I was unfortunately incapable of retaining it for more than ten or fifteen minutes at the most, that is to say the time required to take it in. From then on it might as well never have been uttered.' (Pause.) Tsstss!
A
(With satisfaction.) You see. (Pause.) Where does that come in?
B
In a letter presumably never posted to an anonymous admiratrix.
A
An admiratrix? He had admiratrixes?
B
It begins: 'Dear friend and admiratrix…' That's all we know.
A
Come, Morvan, calm yourself, letters to admiratrixes, we all know what they're worth. No need to take everything literally.
35
B
(Violently, slapping down his hand on the pile of papers.) There's the record, closed and final. That's what we're going on. Too late now to start saying that (slapping to his left) is right and that (slapping to his right) wrong. You're a pain in the arse.
Pause.
A
Good. Let us sum up.
B
We do nothing else.
A
A black future, an unpardonable past—so far as he can remember, inducements to linger on all equally preposterous and the best advice dead letter. Agreed?
B
An heirless aunt preposterous?
A
(Warmly.) He's not the interested type. (Sternly.) One has to consider the client's temperament. To accumulate documents is not enough.
B
(Vexed, slapping on his papers.) Here, as far as I'm concerned the client is here and nowhere else.
A
All right. Is there a single reference there to personal gain? That old aunt, was he ever as much as commonly civil to her? And that dairy-woman, come to that, in all the years he's been going to her for his bit of cheddar, was he ever once wanting in respect? (Pause.) No, Morvan, look you— (Feeble miaow. Pause. Second miaow, louder.)
B
That must be the cat.
A
Sounds like it. (Long pause.) So, agreed? Black future, unpardonable —
B
As you wish. (He starts to tidy back the papers in the briefcase. Wearily.) Let him jump.
A
No further exhibit?
B
Let him jump, let him jump. (He finishes tidying, gets up with the briefcase in his hand.) Let's go.
A consults his watch.
A
It is now… ten… twenty-five.We have no train before eleven twenty. Let us kill the time here, talking of this and that.
B
What do you mean, eleven twenty? Ten fifty.
36
A takes a time-table from his pocket, opens it at relevant page and hands it to B.
A
Where it's marked with a cross. (B consults the time-table, hands it back to A and sits down again. Long pause. A clears his throat. Pause. Impassionately.) How many unfortunates would be so still today if they had known in time to what extent they were so? (Pause.) Remember Smith?
B
Smith? (Pause.) Never knew anyone of that name.
A
Yes you did! A big fat redhair. Always to be seen hanging round World's End. Hadn't done a hand's turn for years. Reputed to have lost his genitals in a shooting accident. His own double-barrel that went off between his legs in a moment of abstraction, just as he was getting set to let fly at a quail.
B
Stranger to me.
A
Well to make a long story short he had his head in the oven when they came to tell him his wife had gone under an ambulance. Hell, says he, I can't miss that, and now he has a steady job in Marks and Spencer's. (Pause.) How is Mildred?
B
(Disgustedly.) Oh you know—(Brief burst of birdsong. Pause.) Good God!
A
Philomel!
B
Oh that put the heart across me!
A
Hsst! (Low.) Hark hark! (Pause. Second brief burst, louder. Pause.) It's in the room! (He gets up, moves away on tiptoe.) Come on, let's have a look.
B
I'm scared!
He gets up none the less and follows cautiously in the wake of A. A advances on tiptoe upstage right, B tiptoes after.
A
(Turning.) Hsst! (They advance, halt in the corner. A strikes a match, holds it above his head. Pause. Low.) She's not here. (He drops the match and crosses the stage on tiptoe followed on tiptoe by B. They pass before the window, halt in the corner upstage left. Match as before. Pause.) Here she is!
B
(Recoiling.) Where?
37
A squats. Pause.
A
Lend me a hand.
B
Let her be! (A straightens up painfully, clutching to his belly a large birdcage covered with a green silk cloth fringed with beads. He starts to stagger with it towards the table.) Give it here.
B helps to carry the cage. Holding it between them they advance warily towards A's table.
A
(Breathing hard.) Hold on a second. (They halt. Pause.) Let's go. (They move on, set down cage gently on the table. A lifts cautiously the cloth on the side away from the audience, peers. Pause.) Show a light.
B takes up the lamp and shines it inside the cage. They peer, stooped. Long pause.
B
There's one dead.
They peer.
A
Have you a pencil? (B hands him a long pencil. A pokes it between the bars of the cage. Pause.) Yes. (He withdraws the pencil, puts it in his pocket.)
B
Hi!
A gives him back his pencil. They peer. A takes B's hand and changes its position.
A
There.
They peer.
B
Is it the cock or the hen?
A
The hen. See how drab she is.
B
(Revolted.) And he goes on singing! (Pause].) There's lovebirds for you!
A
Lovebirds! (Guffaw.) Ah Morvan, you'd be the death of me if I were sufficiently alive! Lovebirds! (Guffaw.) Finches, pinhead! Look at that lovely little green rump! And the blue cap! And the white bars! And the gold breast! (Didactic.) Note moreover the characteristic warble, there can be no mistaking it. (Pause.) Oh you pretty little pet, oh you bonny wee birdie! (Pause. Glum.) And to think all that is organic waste! All that splendour!
38
They peer.
B
They have no seed. (Pause.) No water. (Pointing.) What's that there?
A
That? (Pause. Slow, toneless.) An old cuttle-bone.
B
Cuttle-bone?
A
Cuttle-bone.
He lets the cloth fall back. Pause.
B
Come, Bertrand, don't, there is nothing we can do. (A takes up the cage and goes with it upstage left. B puts down the lamp and hastens after him.) Give it here.
A
Leave it, leave it! (He advances to the corner, followed by B, and puts down the cage where he found it. He straightens up and moves back towards his table, still followed by B. A stops short.) Will you have done dogging me! Do you want me to jump too? (Pause. B goes to A's table, takes up briefcase and chair, goes to his table and sits with back to window. He switches on his lamp, switches it off again immediately.) How end? (Long pause. A goes to window; strikes a match, holds it high and inspects C's face. The match burns out, he throws it out of window.) Hi! Take a look at this! (B does not move. A strikes another match, holds it high and inspects C's face.) Come on! Quick! (B does not move. The match burns out, A lets it fall.) Well I'll be… !
A takes out his handkerchief and raises it timidly towards C's face.
CURTAIN
Act 1
Sitting-room in the Chanal household, comfortably furnished in the latest style. To one side are glass doors leading to the hall, to the other side Chanal's office, partitioned off with door and large windows allowing us to see what happens inside. Double doors at rear to the rest of the house.
At the start of the act Chanal is fiddling with a cylinder phonograph. He gets everything ready, then picks up a piece of paper with a message written on it, starts the machine, clears his throat and declaims.
Chanal
'My dearest sister …' (Cough.) Cahum! 'So the deed is done. From today you'll be a married woman: this afternoon in the sight of the law, this evening in the bed of your husband.' Not bad at all. 'A sobering thought indeed – especially for me, because I know exactly what's involved.'
Enter Francine from the hall: she's been out and wears gloves and a fur stole.
Francine
Ready when you are.
Chanal silences her with an imperious gesture, then gets back to his recording.
Chanal
'Unfortunately, I can't be at your side at this crucial time. An ocean stands between us. But at least my voice will wave across the waves, advising you.'
Francine explodes with laughter. He silences her with the same imperiousness, and declaims again.
Chanal
'You'll discover a secret, penetrate a mystery, the one on all young women's minds …'
Francine
What are you doing?
Chanal
For heaven's sake be quiet.
Francine
No need to shout.
192
Chanal
Sh! I'm recording.
Francine
How stupid you are –
Chanal
(exasperated) Oh!
He stops the machine, gestures her to be quiet, and starts it again.
Francine
(continuing serenely) – to record in here.
Chanal
Don't be ridiculous. And keep your mouth shut. That's a cylinder wasted.
Francine
'A cylinder in time …'
Chanal
Don't tell me. Don't you ever listen to yourself?
Francine
Pardon?
Chanal
You could see I was recording.
Francine
What were you recording?
Chanal
Nothing. A message for Caroline. For New York: the wedding. And you come in and … It hasn't got a brain, you know. Doesn't sort things out. It records everything it hears.
Francine
You mean, everything, exactly … ?
Chanal
Listen.
He plays the cylinder back.
Phonograph
'"My dearest sister …" (Cough.) Cahum! "So the deed is done. From today you'll be a married woman: this afternoon in the sight of the law, this evening in the bed of your husband." Not bad at all. "A sobering thought indeed – especially for me, because I know exactly what's involved."' 'Ready when you are.'
Chanal
(over it) How nice! You're ready.
Phonograph
'"Unfortunately, I can't be at your side at this crucial time. An ocean stands between us. But at least my voice will wave across the waves, advising you."' 'Ha, ha, ha.' 'Shh! "You'll discover a secret, penetrate a193mystery, the one on all young women's minds …"' 'What are you doing?' 'For heaven's sake be quiet.' 'No need to shout.' 'Sh! I'm recording.' 'How stupid you are –'
He switches it off.
Chanal
Satisfied?
Francine
That wasn't me on there.
Chanal
What?
Francine
It wasn't.
Chanal
It made you up?
Francine
I didn't say 'How stupid you are –'. I said, 'How-stupid-you-are-to-record-in-here.' Totally different.
Chanal
I stopped it.
Francine
That's how gossip starts.
Chanal
It's a machine!
Francine
Put another cylinder in, and start again. You can get rid of that stupid stuff about the ocean.
Chanal
What stupid stuff about the ocean?
Francine
'My voice will wave across the waves.'
Chanal
It was a joke.
Francine
A joke, at your sister's wedding.
Chanal
Really.
Francine
'From today you'll be a married woman: this afternoon in the sight of the law, this evening in the bed of your husband.' What a thing to tell a bride on her wedding day.
Chanal
It's not exactly a secret.
Francine
So why remind her? Voice waving across the waves, a smutty cylinder – what are you doing to her?
194
Chanal
Smutty?
Francine
Are you sending full instructions? You're like those people, you say you're going to a play, they say, 'Ah, you'll really enjoy it. Especially the bit when he says this, and she goes …' You sit there watching, and all the time you're thinking, 'I know what's going to happen!' Let them find out for themselves. Caroline may not enjoy it, but at least it'll come as a surprise.
Chanal
How d'you know she won't enjoy it?
Francine
What?
Chanal
What proof d'you have?
Francine
Experience.
Chanal
You know nothing about it.
He removes the cylinder and puts in a new one.
Never mind. Your lunch is getting cold. Ring for Étienne. I've had mine. It's no way to run a household, the husband having his lunch and then, some other time, the wife having her lunch.
Francine
Why didn't you wait, then?
Chanal
Oh, fine. It's my fault!
Enter Étienne.
Chanal
Madame would like her lunch.
Étienne
Yes, Monsieur.
Exit.
Chanal
What do you do out there? Every day it's the same. You've been out since nine this morning.
Francine
That's why I'm back early.
Chanal
Early!
Francine
(confronting him) What is it? What d'you think's195going on? Admit it: you think I've got a lover.
Chanal
(quizzically) Do I now?
Francine
You're always the same. Always think the worst. So now it's a lover.
Chanal shrugs.
Francine
What's that supposed to mean?
Chanal
Darling, don't be silly. Of course you haven't a lover.
Francine
What?
Chanal
It's obvious.
Francine
Really?
Chanal
Some women are born to have lovers, others … aren't.
Francine
Aren't they?
Chanal
I've lived five years with you. I know you. A lover? Don't be silly. You were born to be a wife, a mother – it's not our fault we don't have children. It's just not you, a lover. It isn't: trust me.
Francine
Well, I didn't want to tell you, but you've made me. (With force.) I … have … a … lover.
Chanal
Of course you have.
Francine
A lover. He loves me, and I love him.
Chanal
I congratulate you both.
Francine
I've a lover. A lover, a lover, a lover.
Chanal
And I want you to give him my regards.
Francine
Oh!
Chanal
Darling, you're trying too hard. You're pulling my leg. A lover? You're … out of your league.
196
Francine
What?
Chanal
The league of honest women. I'm sorry.
Francine
How dare you say that to me?
Chanal
I'm right.
Francine
You're not.
Chanal
Am.
Francine
Not.
Chanal
Don't be silly.
Doorbell, off.
Look me in the face and tell me you've a lover.
Francine
You are so … annoying!
Chanal
See? What a silly, what a silly!
He pats her cheek. She pulls away. Enter Étienne.
Étienne
Monsieur, a gentleman.
He hands Chanal a visiting card on a salver.
Chanal
Hubertin! What does he want? Show him in.
Exit Étienne.
Francine
Who's Hubertin?
Chanal
From the club …
Étienne shows in Hubertin.
Étienne
Monsieur Hubertin.
Exit.
Hubertin
Morning.
Chanal
Morning. Allow me: Monsieur Hubertin from the bridge club, Madame Chanal.
Hubertin
Madame …
197
Francine
Monsieur …
Hubertin
I say, haven't we met before?
Francine
I don't think so.
Hubertin
Don't you know someone in my building?
Francine
I don't even know your building.
Hubertin
21 rue du Colisée.
Francine
(quickly) No. Sorry. You're mistaken.
Hubertin
Mm?
Chanal
Of course you are. We don't know anyone.
Hubertin
Ah well, no harm done. I'm sorry.
Francine
No harm done.
She sits.
Chanal
What can we do for you? Do sit down.
Hubertin
It's all right, it won't take a moment. You know the club rules: all debts must be paid within twenty-four hours. I've come to settle up.
Chanal
Oh, no need. Rules are for professionals … not people who know each other.
Hubertin
(taking out his wallet) No, no. Neither a borrower nor a lender be. Many a mickle maks a muckle.
Chanal
The thing is … last night … you were at something of a …
Hubertin
What d'you mean?
Chanal
You know.
Hubertin
You mean I was squiffy.
Chanal
I wasn't implying –
Hubertin
It's all right. I don't mind. (To Francine.) The thing is, you know what it's like, when the sun is198over the yardarm …
Francine
What yardarm?
Hubertin
No, no, it's a habit. The colonies, don't you know?
Francine
The colonies.
Hubertin
Out there for years. And when in Rome, as the saying goes. Sun over the yardarm, glass in the hand. You have to do it. Picked up the habit. And even now I'm home … don't seem to lose the taste for it. Colonial manners, don't you know. Not soaking it up, just … colonial manners.
Francine
I see.
Chanal
When in Rome …
Hubertin
I said that, didn't I? Trouble is, my wife can't see it.
Francine
Ah. Well, she … Yes.
Hubertin
It's all right for her. She's from out there. Half a dozen cocktails, she's got the head for it. But me? Try to keep up with her – well, you do, don't you – fall flat on my face each time. Embarrassing.
Francine / Chanal
Oh, very.
Hubertin
(in a different tone, holding out a banknote) So, here we are. Nine hundred and eighty francs. Here's a thousand. No, don't worry: all's fair and square. I find a glass or two keeps me up to the mark, clears the head, steadies the hands … and for bridge, it's unbeatable. I see everything double.
Chanal
How d'you tell the cards?
Hubertin
Perfectly simple: I divide by two.
Chanal
Of course.
Doorbell, off.
199
Hubertin
Clever, eh?
Chanal
Nine hundred and eighty francs. I'll get your change.
He goes towards the office. Enter Étienne.
Étienne
Monsieur Coustillou.
Chanal
Show him in.
Exit Étienne.
Hubertin
Did he say Coustillou?
Chanal
Oh yes. The MP. Leader of the Opposition. The orator. Coustillou.
Hubertin
You don't mind if I stay, do you? I'd love to meet him.
Chanal
I'll introduce you.
Enter Coustillou, shown in by Étienne. He is the picture of a glossy, successful public figure, well-dressed, superbly coiffeured, sleek and elegant. But he is desperately ill-at-ease and embarrassed and is holding a bunch of asparagus.
Chanal
My dear chap, come in. We were just talking about you.
Coustillou
Were you?
He tries to close the door behind him. But his hands are full: one with asparagus, one with his hat. He dithers, then puts first the asparagus and then the hat on his head. He then shuts the door, just as Étienne shuts it from the outside. His hand is trapped.
Coustillou
Ow.
Chanal
Étienne can shut it.
Coustillou
Mooah, mooah.
He frees his hand, puts down the hat and goes to shake Chanal's hand, the picture of suaveness.
200
Coustillou
How are you?
Chanal is sitting on a low stool, which means that the handshake is impossible to manage.
Chanal
Fine, thanks.
Coustillou
Ah. Mooah.
He goes, suavely, to shake Francine's hand, and falls over the stool.
Coustillou
Ow.
He rubs his shin.
Chanal
You do that every time you come. (To Hubertin.) You'd think he'd remember.
Coustillou has meantime picked up the stool to straighten it, and stands irresolute with it dangling from his hand.
Coustillou
It's … the thing is, I … Mm … Mooah …
Chanal
Don't get so flustered.
Francine
(taking pity) You fluster him. Monsieur Coustillou, ignore my husband. Come and say hello.
Coustillou
(eagerly) Ah!
He hurries forward, contriving inadvertently to hook the legs of the stool he's carrying round a standard lamp and bring it crashing down. He scrabbles to reassemble the pieces.
Coustillou
Mooah.
Chanal
(aside) Exactly: a bull in a china shop.
Coustillou tries to recover his savoir-faire, standing up and extending his hand with a politician's smile. Unfortunately he's still draped in the stool.
Francine
Put the stool down first.
Coustillou
Sorry.
201
He looks for somewhere to put it.
Chanal
(aside) This can go on all night.
Coustillou goes man-to-man to Francine and pumps her hand, then smirks up to Chanal and kisses his hand flirtatiously.
Coustillou
Old fellow … my dear …
Chanal
Start again.
Coustillou
Sorry.
He starts back towards Francine.
Coustillou
Only joking.
Chanal steers him towards Hubertin.
Chanal
Monsieur Hubertin. He's very anxious to meet you.
Coustillou
Ah. Aha?
Hubertin
A fervent admirer.
Coustillou
Aha? Mm … ooah.
Chanal
Do put that down.
Coustillou
What down? (Realising he still has the asparagus.) Oh, this down. Mooaaah.
He dithers, trying to find the right place for it, finally gives it to Hubertin.
Chanal
He doesn't want it.
Coustillou
What? It's a branch … um, bouquet … um, it's asparagus.
Chanal
We didn't think it was candyfloss.
Francine
Are you fond of asparagus, Monsieur Coustillou?
Coustillou
Oh no.
Chanal
So why d'you carry it?
202
Coustillou
(completely thrown) I … um … you see … it's … I thought … it's to …
Chanal
To break the ice.
Coustillou
Exactly.
Chanal
Ah, fine. Just what you need. A brilliant idea. You're the clumsiest man in the universe, so you make things easier for yourself by carting round asparagus.
Coustillou
Mooah.
Chanal
Put it in the hall.
Coustillou
Yes! Yes! Thank you!
He makes for the door. On the way he sees in his path the stool which he fell over earlier, and makes a last-minute, matador's swerve to avoid it.
Chanal
Very good.
Coustillou
(nervously) Ha, ha.
Exit.
Francine
Leave him alone.
Chanal
What a clown.
Hubertin
That's Coustillou the orator? Voice like thunder, brings tears to every eye … ?
Chanal
He does to mine.
Hubertin
What a tragedy.
Chanal
He makes me cry.
Francine
You don't have to make him worse.
Enter Coustillou, without asparagus. He is very ill at ease.
Chanal
Thought what to do with it, then?
Coustillou
What? Oh. I … Yes.
Chanal
Feel better now?
203
Coustillou
Well, I … No, I … You see I … moo …
Enter Étienne with a card on a salver in one hand and the asparagus in the other. He takes them to Francine.
Étienne
For Madame.
Francine
Pardon?
She takes them. Exit Étienne. Coustillou is on the rack. She looks at the asparagus, then reads the card.
Francine
'From the office of Alphonse Coustillou.'
She looks at Coustillou. He tries to lean nonchalantly on the back of the sofa, but misjudges the angle and prevents himself falling only by vaulting right over it and sitting with a bump. He sits bolt upright, clutching his knees and grinning nervously.
Francine
Monsieur Coustillou, you shouldn't have.
Coustillou
Oh, you know …
He gets up.
Chanal
You brought it for us. Why didn't you say so? Asparagus, in March. Where did you get it?
Coustillou
Oh, you know …
He tries to look man-of-the-world.
Francine
I'll tell cook to serve it for dinner. And you must stay and help us enjoy it.
Chanal
(to Hubertin) I'll get your change.
Exeunt. Coustillou waits till they've gone, then releases his pent-up frustration by punching the back of the sofa in a fury. This only works him up even more, and he suddenly whirls on Hubertin and wags his finger threateningly in his face.
Coustillou
Mmmoo … mmooo … You think I'm an idiot.
Hubertin
No I don't.
Coustillou
Oh yes you do. Well, you're wrong.
204
He goes and peers longingly off in the direction Francine exited, then returns to the charge.
Coustillou
I may look like an idiot, but I'm not an idiot.
Hubertin
I never said –
Coustillou
I'd like to see someone call me an idiot. (Gazing abstractedly off again.) Just let them try. I'll show them. Idiot!
Hubertin
Don't be silly. Everyone knows –
Coustillou
That I'm an idiot?
Hubertin
Yes. I mean, no. You're flustering me. You, an idiot? How could anyone think so?
Coustillou
(gazing off) Well, then.
Hubertin
Exactly. You're the leader of the opposition. You could bring down the government.
Coustillou
Any time I want. An idiot! I'll show them.
Hubertin
It's all right …
Coustillou
I'll stand up in the Assembly, I'll look them in the eye, I'll say (In a huge voice.) 'In the name of the République …'
Enter Francine, by the door he's been gazing at.
Francine
There we are. All ready.
Coustillou
(struck dumb by her arrival) Eugh … Erghh … Moooooo.
Francine
Did I hear someone shouting?
Hubertin
He was.
Francine
Monsieur Coustillou? Is anything the matter?
Coustillou
I … Wheeee …
He picks up Francine's hat from where she put it down earlier,205and is about to cram it on his head when he realises what he's doing.
Coustillou
Meeooo.
Francine
Monsieur Coustillou, shouting. I don't believe it. No.
She beams at him. He is transfixed.
Coustillou
Ooooaaaaah …
Hubertin
(aside) The people's choice.
Enter Chanal with change.
Chanal
Twenty francs. Thanks very much.
Hubertin
No, thank you. If you'll excuse me …
Chanal
You have to go?
Hubertin
Afraid so. Business. Much better now, in the morning –
Chanal
(joking) Than when the sun's over the yardarm, eh?
Hubertin
(serious) Oh yes. Monsieur Coustillou, I –
He goes to shakes hands with Coustillou, but is disconcerted to find him staring at him absolutely fixedly, lost in a world of his own. Chanal snaps his fingers.
Chanal
Coustillou. Hey, Coustillou.
Coustillou
(like a man startled out of sleep) Wha … ? Whey!
Chanal
Time to go. Monsieur wants to shake your hand.
Coustillou
Oh. Sorry. Monsieur …
Chanal
Thank you.
Hubertin
Madame.
206
Francine
Au revoir, Monsieur.
Chanal
I'll see you out.
Exeunt Chanal and Hubertin. Coustillou and Francine are left. She goes to the door to see the others off. He wriggles and writhes round the room, trying, without being embarrassed, to inch his way to the table where he left his hat. After a moment, enter Chanal.
Chanal
That's that, then. Time for lunch, Francine.
Francine
I'm ready.
Chanal
Take Coustillou with you. I want to finish my recording.
Francine
Monsieur Coustillou, if you don't mind putting up with me…
Coustillou
Wheeooaaaaaaah.
He hurtles towards her.
Chanal
Mind the sofa.
Coustillou swerves just in time, and exit with Francine.
Chanal goes back to his phonograph. Doorbell, off.
Chanal
(declaiming into the machine) 'My dearest sister, so the deed is done. From today you'll be a married woman. Tonight you'll discover a secret, penetrate a mystery, the one on all young women's minds …'
Enter Étienne with a card on a salver. We can see Massenay waiting in the hall.
Étienne
Monsieur …
Chanal
(stopping the phonograph furiously) Will you be quiet?
Étienne
But Monsieur …
Chanal
Can't you see I'm talking?
Étienne
Who to, Monsieur?
207
Chanal
Mind your own business. Obviously not you. It's a conspiracy. First Madame, then you. What? What is it?
Étienne
There's a gentleman, Monsieur.
Massenay is now at the open door, and can hear everything. Chanal is aware of this.
Chanal
A gentleman. Who needs him? I don't need him.
Étienne
This is his card.
Chanal
I don't need his card, and I don't need him. I'm busy. I'm out. Tell him.
Massenay
(from the door, affably) Monsieur, so sorry to disturb you.
Chanal
(jumping) Erg! (Instantly recovering; with overwhelming affability.) Not at all. My dear Monsieur.
Massenay
If you're busy, I can come back.
Chanal
Not at all. I wouldn't hear of it. Please do come in.
Massenay
How kind.
He comes in. Meanwhile, in dumbshow, Chanal and Étienne exchange opinions. 'This is preposterous.' 'Oh, Monsieur.' 'Get out of here.' Exit Étienne. Chanal comes down to Massenay.
Chanal
What can I do for you? Do please sit down.
Massenay
You are Monsieur Chanal?
Chanal
Entirely.
Massenay
You own this building?
Chanal
Technically, my wife does. But as manager …
Massenay
It comes to the same thing. Your ground floor apartment's empty.
208
Chanal
Indeed it is.
Massenay
I need a pied-à-terre. It would be perfect.
Chanal
You've seen it?
Massenay
No need. It's perfect.
Chanal
(baffled) Ah.
Massenay
The rent is … ?
Chanal
(sizing him up) Well now … three thousand … eight …
Massenay
That's settled then: four.
Chanal
Pardon?
Massenay
I said, 'That's settled, four.'
Chanal
Settled. I was …
Massenay
Four's good. Four quarters in the year, a thousand a quarter, cash down, no shilly-shallying. Well?
Chanal
Whatever you say, then. Four.
Massenay
Thank you. As for maintenance, repairs …
Chanal
My responsibility.
Massenay
Excuse me: mine.
Chanal
Ah. Fine.
A thought suddenly strikes him. He proceeds carefully.
Just one thing … You're so accommodating … I ought to mention …
Massenay
Yes?
Chanal
A young man like yourself … the apartment does belong to my wife … a matter of … Oh, for heaven's sake, the lease has a morality clause.
Massenay
No problem.
209
Chanal
(once again baffled) Ah.
Massenay
Bring women off the streets? Not me.
Chanal
No, no. We're men of the world. I mean, now and then … We wouldn't hold you to it absolutely.
Massenay
No question of that whatever.
Chanal
I wasn't implying … We wouldn't want you to … I mean, now and then: your mother, your sister …
Massenay
Not with my mother, not my sister.
Chanal
I didn't mean …
Massenay
I promise you. This building … the front hall … your concierge … No women will call for me.
Chanal
Splendid, Monsieur. Thank you. If all tenants were like you, a landlord's life would be –
Massenay
No sense making obstacles.
Chanal
Whatever you say.
He goes to fetch documents from his office, grimacing to the audience: 'This is a strange one.'
I've got agreements drawn up ready. We just fill in the details.
Massenay
Excellent.
Chanal
We'll start with your name.
Massenay
It's on my card.
Chanal
Ah. You mean … ? Of course. (Reading the card.) Émile Massenay. You're not … ?
Massenay
No, no, no. Coincidence.
Chanal
I don't mean that. I mean …
Massenay
Everyone makes the same mistake.
Chanal
(lost in his thoughts) Massenay. Massenay. You210didn't go to school in Saint-Louis?
Massenay
Till I was seven.
Chanal
So did I! What a coincidence! Don't you remember? Chanal … Chanal …
Massenay
Chanal … (He turns away, thinking it out.) Chanal …
Chanal thumps him in the middle of the back, schoolboy fashion.
Chanal
Snotnose.
Massenay
Pardon?
Chanal
Sorry.
Massenay
No, no. You took me by surprise. Now I remember …
He pushes him in his turn, schoolboy fashion.
Snotnose yourself.
Chanal
I knew you'd remember. Chanal. Chanal?
Massenay
That's right. The one who kept crying. The one whose mother was a …
Chanal
No, no. Me. I'm Chanal.
Massenay
Of course you are. Sorry. Monsieur Chanal. I didn't put two and two tog – Unforgivable.
Chanal
Better late than never. Snotnose!
He drapes his arm round Massenay's neck.
Chanal
Now d'you recognise me?
Massenay drapes his arm round him, so that they're attached like three-legged racers. They prance across the stage, this way then that way.
Chanal
That's better.
Massenay
Oh yes.
211
Chanal
When you've flicked ink-pellets at each other … there's nothing to beat it. You make friendships later, but not like that.
Massenay
At our age, especially.
Chanal
That's right. Oh, what times they were! (Businesslike tone.) Do please sit down.
They sit side by side. He goes all sentimental again.
Well, well. Good old Massenay. Well, well, well, well, well. D'you remember Bourrache, the one who was always pulling faces?
Massenay
That's right.
Chanal
I still bump into him.
Massenay
Really?
Chanal
Hasn't changed a bit. Same old faces.
Massenay
You're joking.
Chanal
Bursting with cheerfulness. Full of the joys of life. These days he's an undertaker.
Massenay
Stands to reason.
Chanal
Poteau, remember Poteau?
Massenay
No.
Chanal
The one with that sister. She kept looking, remember? Sideways. What a squint that was! 'Two for one', don't you remember?
Massenay
Not remotely.
Chanal
Anyway, he's dead.
Massenay
Poteau? Poor fellow.
Chanal
Absolutely.
Massenay
What did he die of?
212
Chanal
He went just like that.
Massenay
Oh, not like that.
Chanal
Just like that. Anyone could have told him. If you must have a lady friend who … and who … the last thing you do is, after a five-course meal … literally, the last thing you do …
Massenay
You don't mean … ?
Chanal
At least he died with a smile on his face.
Massenay
Poor old Poteau.
Chanal
(new tone) Just a minute. You never knew a Poteau. He was at senior school.
Massenay
I thought I didn't … Why are you upsetting me for nothing? What do I care if he's dead? Poteau!
Chanal
After all, we all have to go.
Massenay
I never meet anyone I was at school with. You know what it's like. You think you'll be friends for ever. You grow up, you drift apart … I only meet one these days. He's done very nicely. They're the only ones you do meet. Except the ones who ask you for money. I don't know if you remember him: Coustillou, the MP.
Chanal
You're joking. He's here.
Massenay
Here?
Chanal
In there, with my wife. He's one of my oldest friends. He's always here.
Massenay
Amazing. He's one of my oldest friends. He's never mentioned you.
Chanal
They can't mention everyone.
Massenay
Coustillou, eh? Poor old Coustillou. The state he's in.
Chanal
What state he's in?
213
Massenay
Because he's in love.
Chanal
In love?
Massenay
Hasn't he told you?
Chanal
No.
Massenay
He talks of nothing else. His hopeless grand passion.
Chanal
Hopeless? Who for?
Massenay
He never says. Someone's wife, that's all I know. He's discretion personified. Tells me every detail, but never names names.
Chanal
He never said a word to me. Secrets, from me! Well, it's hopeless anyway.
Massenay
That's what upsets him.
Chanal
I could have given him a few tips, told him what to do. I know this woman.
Massenay
You don't.
Chanal
Well, not this one specifically. I know women, in general. 'What are you waiting for?' – that's what I'd have said. 'Shoulder arms, quick march, allez-oup! What are you waiting for?' Words to that effect. I wanted to spare your blushes.
Massenay
You think I haven't encouraged him?
Chanal
So what's stopping him? The husband?
Massenay
That's one reason.
Chanal
You're joking! One more cuckold?
Massenay
Oh, he'd get over the husband. The main reason is, his problem. He's terminally shy. He falls for a woman, doesn't stand a chance. Until he gets her, he falls over his own feet, can't get a word out – and the more he does that, the less he gets her. Passion, brush-off,214passion, brush-off: it's a vicious circle.
Chanal
He's had it, then?
Massenay
That's the whole point, he hasn't. And he never will, unless someone takes pity, makes the first move, the kindness of her heart …
Chanal
It doesn't work that way.
Massenay
Especially not with this one. She's no idea, he claims. And she never will have: every time he sees her he stutters, he blushes, falls over furniture, he's useless.
Chanal
(vastly amused) I know, I've seen him.
Massenay
What?
Chanal
(double take) Just a minute …
Massenay
(getting there ahead of him) It isn't.
Chanal
It is! (Amused again.) My wife.
Massenay
Your wife?
Chanal
The wife in question: my wife. Whenever he sees her, all that … and that … It's obvious.
Massenay
No, no, no, no, no, no. It isn't. I didn't. You mustn't. He isn't. They can't be. Oh God.
Chanal
I think it's very funny. In any case: he's in love with my wife. What's wrong with that? So long as that's all he is. And it is. My wife's an honest woman.
Massenay
(fervently) Oh, she is. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes …
Chanal
You're just saying that. You've never met her. But I have. I know her very well. No problems with her – and none from Coustillou.
Massenay
Oh, no, no, no, no, no.
Chanal
So long as he's falling over furniture, I sleep easy in my bed.
215
Massenay
Oh, do that, do that.
Chanal
Even so, it's funny. Coustillou! I have to tell her. Francine!
Francine
(off) What is it?
Massenay
What are you doing? Don't breathe a word to Coustillou. He'll kill me.
Chanal
Trust me. Ha! He'd have a heart attack!
Massenay
Like Poteau did.
Chanal
What? Oh. Poteau. Ha! No, this would be before …
Massenay
Exactly.
Chanal
Ah. (Calling off.) Francine!
Francine
(off) What is it?
Chanal
I want to tell you something.
Enter Francine. She doesn't see Massenay.
Francine
What's the matter?
Chanal
You'll never guess. You and your high horse.
Francine
What are you talking about? (Seeing Massenay.) Monsieur.
Chanal
Sorry. My friend Massenay. Émile Massenay.
Francine
Pleased to meet you. Just a minute, you're not –
Massenay
(to Chanal) It's always the same.
Francine
You're not related?
Massenay
Unfortunately. He's E.T. and I'm A.Y.
Francine
What bad luck.
Massenay
It can't be helped. A.Y.
216
Chanal
Never mind A.Y. This is Massenay from school!
Francine
I'm sorry. I hardly know anyone.
Chanal
Never mind that. D'you know what someone's just told me? (For maximum effect.) Coustillou's in love with you.
Francine
Who told you?
Chanal
He did.
Francine
(to Massenay) You did?
Massenay
How could I? I didn't even know. All I said was, Coustillou's in love with someone's wife, but whenever he sees her he goes all … goes all … That's all. You said, 'My God, my wife!' I didn't.
Chanal
It comes to the same thing. (To Francine.) Well? Well? Aren't you amazed? Isn't it a revelation?
Francine
(calmly) I've known for ages.
Chanal
What?
Francine
Of course I have.
Chanal
He told you?
Francine
Just as well he didn't. When a man tells you he loves you, don't believe him. But when he hides it, it's obvious.
Chanal
I never even noticed.
Francine
(with gentle irony, no edge) You're a husband. You can't be expected to notice things.
Massenay
Touché, Madame.
Chanal
She's right. Now I think about it … it's obvious. I mean, for a start, all that asparagus.
Massenay
Asparagus.
Chanal
Today, yes. Pears, yesterday. My wife just has217to say, quite casually, 'Pears look good this morning', or 'I really fancy some asparagus', and bam! Two hours later, there's Coustillou, panting at the door with a bunch of asparagus or a pair of pears.
Massenay
You're joking.
Francine
I have to think what I'm saying.
Chanal
It's not as if it was anyone else. The other day I had indigestion, he was there, I said, 'I wish I had a peppermint' – nothing! If my wife had said it, he'd have brought her a shopful.
Francine
You are silly.
Chanal
You'll see, yourself. Now we're going to be neighbours. (To Francine.) Massenay's just rented the flat downstairs.
Francine
You're joking.
Chanal
I was just fetching the papers. (To Massenay.) Excuse me a moment …
Massenay
Of course.
Chanal
Get to know each other. I won't be long.
Exit into his office. Pause. Francine is watching Chanal leave. Massenay is fiddling with a vase from the sideboard, pretending great interest in it. This continues till Chanal closes the door. Then:
Francine
Darling! The flat downstairs!
Massenay
Oh yes.
Francine
(running into his arms) Oh darling, darling …
Massenay
Wasn't it brilliant? You were so worried yesterday, at the rue du Colisée, afraid someone had seen you …
Francine
I was right. A friend of my husband's lives there. He saw me arrive, he saw me leave. Fortunately,218my husband didn't notice. But he could've …
Massenay
Don't! It's all right now. No risk of being seen, no need to go out. Your own building, you can … we can … in our own building. So much more convenient!
Francine
For all three of us: you, me, my husband … Oh, darling.
Massenay
Oh, darling.
They are in each other's arms. Knock, off. They spring apart, looking nonchalant as they were when Chanal went out.
Francine
Come in.
Enter Coustillou, timidly.
Massenay
(as if finishing a remark begun earlier) … quite unlike the Eiffel Tower …
Coustillou
Hoohoo. I was just …
Francine
Monsieur Coustillou. Come in.
Coustillou
Sorry.
He goes to the piano stool and sits. He hasn't seen Massenay.
Massenay
Afternoon, Coustillou.
Coustillou jumps back and flattens himself against the wall.
Coustillou
Erg! What are you doing here?
Massenay
Visiting an old friend. An old school friend. Chanal.
Coustillou
Arg. Harg.
Massenay
He introduced me to Madame Chanal.
Coustillou
(in a panic) Oh, mooah … Monsieur Massenay, Madame Chanal.
Massenay
No, he's done it already. It's been done.
Coustillou
Mooarg.
219
Massenay
What's wrong with you?
Coustillou
You can't. It isn't. Whatever they say. It isn't her.
Massenay
What d'you mean?
Francine
Not me that what?
Coustillou
Not, erg, hoo, arg, nothing.
He hunches up on the piano stool.
Francine
(after a moment) Shouldn't you be going, Monsieur Coustillou?
Coustillou
No, me, no.
Francine
Didn't you say you had an appointment?
Coustillou
I can put it off.
He tries to look casual, leaning back nonchalantly and forgetting he's on a piano stool. He falls, recovers himself, puts his hat on, whips it off, puts it on his knee (still trying to look lackadaisical), then concentrates hard on the succeeding dialogue, frowning as if it's a philosophical discussion, turning his head hungrily to each speaker as if it's a tennis match.
Francine
Monsieur Massenay, what were we talking about?
Massenay
Just a minute. It was … no. It was … the Eiffel Tower. The second storey. The bookstall. You were saying there was a newspaper you liked the look of.
Francine
Was I?
Massenay
The Stockholm Tidningen, didn't you say it was?
Francine
That's right.
Massenay
I said I'd –
Before he can continue, Coustillou is on his feet, darting to the door like arrow from bow.
220
Francine
Going, Monsieur Coustillou?
Coustillou
I won't be a moment! A moment! Whey!
Exit, fast. Pause.
Massenay
It's really too easy.
Francine
You're inspired.
Massenay
By love.
Francine
Oh, darling.
Massenay
Darling.
Francine
If you knew how I feel! Since we … I want to tell everyone. People in the street, the servants, my husband …
Massenay
Careful.
Francine
It's all right, I won't do it. It's just … keeping a secret … and if I'll tell him, he'd be furious, and if he was furious he'd make a scene, and if he made a scene he'd have to say your name … your beloved name …
Massenay
It's not a good idea.
Francine
I know. We mustn't be selfish. If he knew he'd be so sad, and he doesn't deserve … it's not his fault we … he didn't … Better not.
Massenay
Better not.
Francine
It's such a shame, I can't have a lover without cheating my husband.
Massenay
You've doubts?
Francine
Doubts? Oh, look in my eyes!
Massenay
Oh, darling.
Francine
All I meant was … I was just saying it. I don't mean it. (Fiddling with the things on the piano.) You221know how it is. They teach you in school … Morality … I mean … Fortunately, you were strong. You ignored all that.
Massenay
(smugly) Well.
Francine
When you set your heart on something …
Massenay
(the same) You know.
Francine
If you hadn't insisted, I'd have been so sad …
Massenay
Why shouldn't I have insisted?
Francine
I mean, if you hadn't, I'd have … forgotten my wifely duty … run after you …
Massenay
I say! If I'd only known.
Francine
You're shocked.
Massenay
Good heavens, shocked!
Francine
It's the very first time I've –
Massenay
I say! You've never betrayed him before?
Francine
No, never!
Massenay
Promise you'll be faithful always.
Francine
Oh, I do, I love you.
Massenay
Oh, darling.
Francine
Oh, darling.
In her ecstasy she accidentally, and without noticing, jogs the phonograph, which starts to record.
What did people do before they fell in love?
Massenay
They waited for the day.
Francine
How soon can we – ?
Massenay
You decide.
222
Francine
Tonight.
Massenay
We could.
Francine
I've managed to get away. I'll tell my husband I'm going to the theatre with my mother. A whole evening, just for you and me.
Massenay
Wonderful. But, just for tonight, we'll have to make do again with 21 rue du Colisée.
Francine
Doesn't matter. I'm used to it now.
Massenay
And in love, so much in love.
Francine
Oh, darling.
They clinch. Chanal opens his door. They spring to their former positions.
Massenay
No, really, the Eiffel Tower.
Enter Chanal, papers in hand.
Chanal
One thing …
Massenay
What?
Chanal
How long? The lease?
Massenay
(gazing at Francine) As long as life is in me.
Chanal
Don't be silly. Three years? Six years?
Massenay
Not nearly enough.
Chanal
Fine, twelve. Reviewable every three, at your discretion. Your discretion … ?
Massenay
Rely on it.
Chanal
Excuse me again.
Exit. He leaves the door open. Pause. Massenay goes to embrace Francine.
Francine
Shh! He'll hear you.
Massenay
Right.
223
They sit on the sofa. Gaze into each other's eyes. Are magnetically drawn together in a deep, long kiss. Chanal is talking over his shoulder from his office.
Chanal
Have you run out of conversation, the two of you?
Francine
(quickly) No, no.
Chanal
Don't mind me. You carry on.
Massenay
We didn't want –
Chanal
I won't be a moment.
Francine
(hissing at Massenay) Say something.
Massenay
What?
Francine
Anything. (Aloud.) Tell me about your primary school.
Massenay
(lyrically: he's talking about his school, but he's proposing love) It's amazing. The Hubert Harcourt School. (Kiss.) Founded by Hubert Harcourt. (Kiss.) Hence the name. (Kiss.) 1813. (Kiss.) You climb the imposing steps … (Kiss.) The hall, its statues, its polished parquet … (Kiss.) Portrait of the fou – (Kiss.) – nder, that he sat for in person at the time …
These rhapsodies are interrupted by a huge burst of mocking laughter from Chanal. Massenay has just time to hurl himself away from Francine when Chanal comes in.
Chanal
Why are you in such raptures? It's only a primary school.
Massenay
I wasn't.
Chanal
You were. You should have heard yourself. (Imitating.) 'You climb the imposing steps … (Pause.) The hall, its statues, its polished parquet … (Pause.) Portrait of the fou – (Pause.) – nder, that he sat for in person …' All those pauses for emotion. It's ridiculous.
224
Massenay
I'd no idea.
Chanal
You really love that school.
Massenay
(making sheep's eyes at Francine) Oh, yes.
Chanal
Here's the lease. Two copies. I've signed one, all you have to do is sign the other and we keep a copy each.
Massenay
Fine. Have you got a pen?
Chanal
Don't be ridiculous. Have you never done this before? Take it away, read it carefully, then sign and return one copy.
Massenay
If you say so. (Gathering his hat.) Well, I won't impose any longer.
Chanal
You, imposing? Never. Delighted to see you again.
Massenay
Me too. Madame, honoured to have met you.
Francine
I hope, Monsieur, now that we're neighbours, that we'll see much more of you.
Massenay
Oh, I do agree. Good afternoon, Madame. (To Chanal.) Bye, you.
Francine, unseen by Chanal, blows a kiss. Chanal feels the wind of it on his neck. He looks round for the source of the breeze. Then sees that Étienne has opened the door.
Chanal
Ah, Étienne. Show Monsieur out. (To Massenay.) Bye, snotnose.
Exeunt Massenay and Étienne.
Francine
What a nice man, your friend.
Chanal
Yes, isn't he? (Pause.) Had you thought of … getting closer to him?
Francine
What d'you mean? Oh. Yes.
225
Chanal
No problem. Just requires organisation.
Francine
Oh, yes.
Chanal
I'd be really delighted. I mean, if you hadn't liked him … Women, one never knows. You're wonderful.
Francine
You don't need to thank me.
Chanal
(going to the phonograph) Now, for heaven's sake, let me finish my cylinder.
Francine
I'm going out. I'm taking Mama to the theatre.
Chanal
(kissing her) Good night, darling. Don't be too late home.
Francine
As soon as it's over. I'll take a cab.
Chanal
Go on, go on.
He shoos her out. Then fiddles with the phonograph.
Now, where were we?
Phonograph
'My dearest sister, so the deed is done. From today you'll be a married woman.'
Chanal
That's the place.
Phonograph
'You'll discover a secret, penetrate a mystery, the one on all young women's minds …' (Continuing with Francine and Massenay.) 'What did people do before they fell in love?' 'They waited for the day.'
Chanal
Francine's voice.
Phonograph
'How soon can we – ?' 'You decide.' 'Tonight.' 'We could.' 'I've managed to get away …'
Chanal
What did she say?
Phonograph
'I'll tell my husband I'm going to the theatre with my mother. A whole evening, just for you226and me.'
Chanal
My God, my God!
Phonograph
'Wonderful. But, just for tonight, we'll have to make do again with 21 rue du Colisée.'
Chanal
Got them!
Phonograph
'Doesn't matter. I'm used to it now.'
Chanal
That's enough!
He stuffs a hanky into the bell. The machine continues, muffled but remorseless.
Phonograph
'And in love, so much in love.' 'Oh, darling.'
Chanal
Treachery!
He hurls himself to the door.
Étienne! Étienne!
Étienne
(hurrying in) Yes, Monsieur?
Chanal
Where's Madame?
Étienne
She went out, Monsieur. Just now, Monsieur.
Chanal
Fine. Go! Go, go!
Exit Étienne.
Chanal
Went out! She couldn't wait. Her lover, she couldn't wait! If I knew who it was … He must have been here. Which one?
Doorbell, off.
It was him! My God, the swine! Pretending, and all the time he … Coustillou! That asparagus business. Coustillou! Grr, the swine.
Étienne shows in Coustillou, with an enormous bundle of newspapers.
227
Coustillou
I couldn't remember the name, so I got them all.
Chanal
Get out!
Coustillou
Pardon?
Chanal
Get out, get out, get out.
Coustillou
But I've got the papers.
Chanal
See what I think of them!
He grabs them and starts trying to tear them wildly. They're too strong for him. He throws them away in a fury – right in Étienne's face.
Étienne
Ow!
Chanal
I'm sorry. An accident. (Advancing on Coustillou.) You. Don't just stand there. 21 rue du Colisée.
Coustillou
Pardon?
Chanal
She's waiting.
Coustillou
Who is?
Chanal
My wife, you fool! Go to her! Make love to her! Go on, go on!
Coustillou
Make love –
Chanal
Traitor! Viper! Earthworm! Out, out, out!
He bundles him out.
Étienne, you see that swine? If he so much as darkens this door again, kick him downstairs. D'you hear? Go on! Go on!
He storms round the stage, turning at the last moment to say to the audience:
This feels so good!
He sweeps into his office and slams the door, as the curtain falls.
Massenay's love-nest in the rue du Colisée. The usual ornate, rococo style: the cupids and harlequins framing the mirror over the fireplace are typical. Apart from the entrance door (which needs a serviceable lock), a second door opens into the inner room. There is a window, lavishly curtained. The principal furniture is a four-poster bed; other items – sofa, chairs, tables – ad lib. There is a speaking-tube with the usual whistle attached, to attract the attention of the person at the other end.
When the curtain rises, the day clothes of Francine and Massenay are on separate chairs; Massenay's long-johns and top hat are also there. The two love-birds are fast asleep in the bed. Francine is peaceful, but Massenay is having disturbed dreams, which culminate in him sitting bolt upright, pointing into the darkness of the room and shouting.
Massenay
Further left! Further left, you fool!
Francine
(starting awake) What's the matter? What is it?
Massenay
He's going to land on us.
Francine
(shaking him) It's just a nightmare.
Massenay
Look out! Look out!
Francine
Émile! Wake up!
Massenay
What? Hoo. (Awake.) What's the matter?
Francine
You frightened me half to death.
Massenay
What? Me? How?
Francine
Dreaming out loud like that. My heart's really thumping.
Massenay
I'm sorry.
Francine
Feel it.
Massenay
Darling, I'm sorry. (Jumping out of bed, in his229long nightgown.) I'll fetch you a glass of water.
Francine
You never told me you had nightmares.
Massenay
I don't. I usually just sleep with a sheet. You insisted on the quilt. They always give me nightmares. I thought it was a hot-air balloon.
Francine
Oh, darling, it's my fault. I'm sorry.
Massenay
No, no, it's my fault. My nightmare. Mind you, nightmares: they're worth having, just to wake up from.
Francine
You are clever.
Massenay
It was unforgivable of me, having a nightmare in someone else's arms. Your arms. We went to sleep in each other's arms.
Francine
Oh, Émile, afterwards! Just like the husband and wife in a fairy tale. Going gently off to sleep together, duty done …
Massenay
Oh, darling.
Francine
I completely forgot my husband.
Massenay
I should think so.
Francine
I was transported to Paradise.
Massenay
Naturally.
He is putting on his long-johns.
Francine
Falling asleep in each other's arms. That's what love is. If you don't do that, you can't be in love. No satisfaction at all.
Massenay
Well, I'm not so sure –
Francine
It's in all the stories. I mean, immediately afterwards, there's a moment or two of … of …
Massenay
(in his best Latin accent) Animal triste.
230
Francine
Pardon?
Massenay
It's Latin. Animal triste. It means …
Francine
Never mind, if it's Latin it proves it. Asleep in each other's arms – if you don't have that, it's like going out to dinner in a station.
Massenay
I say! You said I was clever.
Francine
No, I mean it. Going to sleep afterwards makes it seem … domestic, married, not an affair. Respectable.
Massenay
You know everything.
Francine
It was in the stars, we were made for each other. Some things are fated before we're even born. I mean, in the ordinary way, it should have been Coustillou. He's been standing there for weeks. In the ordinary way, he could say he got here first – but no! Brr! I couldn't.
Massenay
Poor Coustillou.
Francine
You think I ought to – ?
Massenay
No, I don't.
Francine
The moment I saw you … we'd never met, didn't know each other … I knew, right away, 'He's the one who'll …' – and you must have known, at the same moment, 'She's the one who'll …'
Massenay
Must I?
Francine
Don't say you didn't. It's like Morse code. Tap tap tap at one end … tap tap tap at the other. You were in the stalls, I was in the gallery, your eyes met mine, and something inside me knew at once –
Massenay
'He's the one who'll …'
Francine
(falling back luxuriously on the pillows) It's wonderful. If we were married, it'd be like this every morning.
231
Massenay
Oh, yes.
Francine
You're lucky, you're free. If I was free too, would you marry me?
Massenay
Like a shot.
Francine
It would be so wonderful. Happiness, any time we chose, for as long as we chose. No clock-watching, ever.
Massenay
No clock-watching! I mean … the theatre must be finishing. It feels like midnight.
Francine
(lazily) So soon! Oh … what time is it?
Massenay
(looking at his watch, on the bedside table) Oh, just … My God!
Francine
(still yawning) What?
Massenay
There's something wrong with it.
Francine
(sitting up) It's not midnight?
Massenay
Six o'clock in the morning.
Francine
What d'you mean, six o'clock in the morning?
Massenay
Six o'clock in the morning.
Francine
It's stopped. We can't have slept all night.
Massenay
It's going. Listen. Tick, tock, tick, tock … It's going.
Francine
If it is, it's fast. You lose all sense of time when you're asleep.
The clock on the mantelpiece gathers itself to chime.
Ah! Listen!
They count the chimes.
Both
Two … three … four … five … six …
232
Massenay
Seven.
But the clock has stopped chiming. It's like treading on a stair that isn't there.
Francine
Six! Six! It's six!
Massenay
Six is bad enough.
Francine
Six is a disaster.
She leaps out of bed and starts pulling on her clothes.
Massenay
Oh God, oh, God, oh God, oh God …
Francine
It's all right for you. You aren't married.
Massenay
(forgetting) Of course I'm married.
Francine
(jumping) Married?
Massenay
No, no, no, no, no, no, yes.
Francine
Married! That's disgusting. You said you were a bachelor.
Massenay
Of course I said I was a bachelor. If you say you're married, you get nowhere.
Francine
Married!
Massenay
My God! What will I tell my wife?
Francine
(raging) Never mind your wife! No one asked you to be married. What am I going to tell my husband?
Massenay
We're done for, done for.
Francine
Don't be ridiculous. I can't tell him that.
Massenay
You're the one that said, 'Let's go to sleep.'
Francine
I did not say, 'Let's go to sleep.' I said, 'I feel so sleepy.' Entirely different.
Massenay
And look where it's landed us. What am I going to do?
Francine
You're so selfish. You're going to do? I'm at my wits' end.
233
Massenay
Well, so am I, twice over: once for you and once for me.
Francine
What are we going to do?
Massenay
There's one way. You're supposed to be at your mother's. Perhaps your husband hasn't gone there yet. Hurry to her, tell her everything –
Francine
What? Tell my mother I … ? Don't be ridiculous.
Massenay
Mothers are women. They must've all –
Francine
How dare you? My mother – ?
Massenay
I didn't say she had. I didn't say mothers have lovers. Ridiculous. I mean, mothers have friends who have … In any case, they understand. It's what they're there for. Tell her everything. She'll send your husband a message: you're not well, you had to stay the night, she insisted …
Francine
The sky's black, black, black!
Massenay
It isn't: look, dawn.
Francine
A comb, quick. Give me a comb.
Massenay
In here!
Francine
If I get out of this, I'll give up lovers for ever.
Massenay
Me too! Oh, me too!
They jostle their way into the inner room and shut the door. Pause. Then we hear a key in the lock, and the door opens to reveal Hubertin. He is completely drunk, his evening wear is slightly dishevelled and he is carrying a light-coloured overcoat, upside down so that the arms drag on the floor, and a pocket torch held the wrong way round so that it illuminates his stomach. (Feydeau's note: It's important that this is not a vulgar drunk-scene – Hubertin is a man of distinction, and his drunkenness is not so much a matter234of falling down as of owlish overemphasis and exaggerated, clumsy care over his movements. The intoxication is mainly in his head: his eyelids droop, but his speech is finicky and self-aware rather than slurred.) He goes up to the bed as quietly as he can, trying to whistle gently to attract attention. The whistling takes all his attention before he finally gets it, more or less, right.
Hubertin
Fweep! It's all right. It's me. Gaby, c'est moi. Dark in here. What's wrong with this torch, shines backwards.
He looks hard at the torch, gradually loses his balance and takes a step or two backwards.
See what it's making me do.
He notices the audience, smiles at them confidentially.
I'm a lil bit … not a lot, just a lil bit …
He goes upstage a bit. He talks to himself, taking both parts.
What was I going to do? Hubertin, think. That's it. The door. What about the door? Oh, shut it. Yes, shut it. I will.
He sashays towards the door, but loses his balance, steps backwards, round, back to the door, down again …
It's the devil of a way …
He finally gets there, drapes himself against the door and shuts it.
Foof. No, just a minute. (To the door.) Don't go away.
He fishes the key out of his pocket, tries several times to fit it into the lock.
This key keeps growing. The keyhole's shrunk. (To the keyhole.) Behave yourself!
He succeeds in locking the door.
There we are. Much more comfy. Odd, isn't it, when you've had a few, amazing things happen.
235
He has made his way to the chair where Massenay's hat and coat and trousers are draped so that in the gloom they look like a person. He talks to them.
What? You agree. Good evening. Bonsoir. I mean, amazing … I live on the fifth floor, but I come up one flight and here I am. Can you explain it? I've had a skinful. Head heavy. Ow …
He palpates his head through his hat.
Much too heavy. Seems enormous …
He lifts off the hat, to reveal a table lighter perched on his head.
That's better. No it isn't. (Feeling it.) It's hard! It's loose! It's coming off!
He catches the lighter as it falls, and looks at it owlishly.
A lighter. How did that get there? Amazing things happen.
He goes to put the lighter on the table, sees Massenay's clothes again.
See what I mean? Amazing. Been here long? (To the audience.) Sh! Shhhh! Can't you see he's sleeping? Dark in here. Where did I put my matches?
He starts trying to find the pockets of his coat. It's still trailing on the floor, still upside down.
Someone's stolen the sleeves. They've put in legs.
He walks it about on the sleeves, then bundles it up and throws it into a corner.
Thing is, I'm a lil bit … So go to bed. What? Go to bed. Don't stand there saying you're a lil bit … Who's arguing? Who's arguing?
He starts undressing.
Take your clothes off.
236
He sees Massenay's clothes again.
No, there they are. So drunk you dint even notice. You undressed and you dint even notice. That's right. So get into bed. Into bed? You'll catch your death of cold. So I will. So get into bed. I'll get into bed.
He gets into the bed, but in such a way that his head is below the pillows and his feet stick out at the bottom.
S'funny. I've got longer.
He dozes. Pause. Enter Francine, talking over her shoulder to Massenay.
Francine
Well, I don't know! Perhaps it's on the bed somewhere.
She feels up and down the bed – and finds Hubertin.
Hubertin
Gaby, no. I've got a headache.
Francine
Émile! Émile!
Hubertin
(sitting bolt upright) Gaby? Gaby?
Massenay
(rushing in) Francine! Francine!
Francine
There's a man in the bed.
Hubertin
There's a man in my wife's bedroom.
He jumps out of bed, rushes to Massenay's clothes on the chair, and starts pulling them on over his own clothes.
Massenay
Monsieur, who are you?
Hubertin
(huge) I'm the husband.
Massenay
Pardon?
Hubertin
The husband! I'm the husband!
Massenay
My trousers. What are you doing with my trousers?
He leaps at him. Francine restrains him.
237
Francine
Émile!
Massenay
(breaking free) Let me get at him.
Hubertin
(over all this) Yours, are they? We'll see about you.
He bundles them up and goes to the window.
Massenay
(still struggling) Where are you going with those?
Hubertin
(throwing open the window) I'll teach you to be my wife's lover.
Massenay
What's he doing!
Hubertin
(throwing the clothes out of the window) Ha-HAH!
Massenay
(breaking free and rushing to the window) No!
Francine
Émile!
Massenay
He's thrown my clothes into the street.
Hubertin
(turning from the window, with immense dignity) Now, sir, begone.
Massenay
You're mad.
Francine
A madman! Help!
Massenay
Stop shouting. You'll wake the whole building.
Francine
Please. Let's do what he says. Let's go.
Massenay
Dressed like this?
Hubertin
Sirrah, I'm waiting.
Massenay
Wait all you like. I' m not leaving.
Francine
Please!
Massenay
The speaking tube. Call the concierge.
Francine
Oh. Yes.
238
She rushes for the speaking tube and starts frantically blowing the whistle. Massenay advances on Hubertin.
Massenay
Now for you.
He rolls up his sleeves. Hubertin ignores him, goes to Francine.
Hubertin
Gaby …
Francine
Émile! He's attacking me.
Massenay
Never fear! I'm here!
He hurls himself between them, knocking Hubertin off balance.
Hubertin
Ho-HO!
Massenay
I'm not scared of you.
Francine
Why doesn't the concierge answer?
She whistles even more frantically. Massenay advances on Hubertin, pointing dramatically at the door.
Massenay
Out! Now!
Hubertin just looks at him.
Massenay
Like that, is it? Shift yourself!
Hubertin stays where he is.
Massenay
Right.
He tries to push him. A man pushing against an oak tree. Hubertin doesn't budge. Massenay leans into his work. Then stops, panting.
Massenay
This is a heavy one.
Francine
Get on with it.
Massenay
(furiously) Don't tell me, tell him!
The struggle begins again. Same result. To Hubertin:
Massenay
You're doing this on purpose.
239
He is bending down, putting all his effort into pushing, like a man trying to budge a train. Hubertin looks down, amused, then bends with drunken dignity and kisses the back of his head.
Massenay
Stop that!
Another kiss.
Don't keep doing that.
Francine
Stop playing silly games and throw him out.
Hubertin has begun remorselessly to move forwards.
Massenay, still bent double and heaving mightily, is carried backwards by the sheer bulk of Hubertin, until he is hard up against the end of the bed.
Massenay
I'm doing the best I can.
Hubertin puts his arms round his thighs, picks him up like a parcel and throws him on the bed.
Massenay
Hey!
Francine
Oh my God.
She rushes to the figure in the bed.
Is that him?
Massenay
(struggling to get up) No, it's me.
He jumps off the bed and advances like a boxer on the mountainous, motionless Hubertin.
Massenay
This'll shift him.
He throws a punch. Hubertin parries, as calmly as a boxing Buddha. Massenay tries another punch, with the same result. He pummels, to no effect. Then Hubertin, slowly, calmly, bops him and sends him spinning across the room.
Massenay
Ow-ooh!
Francine
Now what are you playing at?
Massenay
This! Can't you see? I'm playing at this!240Fetch a candle. How can I see to hit him, unless you fetch a candle?
Francine
Where are they?
Massenay
I don't know. Find one!
Francine
In the inner-room cabinet!
She hurries into the inner room. Hubertin stands there, a delighted child.
Hubertin
When it comes, are we going to fight again?
Massenay
You wait! You just wait! You'll see!
Hubertin
I'll like that.
Enter Francine with a candle. She passes Hubertin, and the flame lights up his face.
Francine
My God, it's Hubertin.
Massenay
What's Hubertin?
Francine
He's a friend of my husband.
Massenay
He's a warthog.
Hubertin
(who has been looking round) Oops.
Francine / Massenay
Now what?
Hubertin
I don't live here.
Francine / Massenay
What?
Hubertin
This isn't the fifth floor.
Francine
(beside herself) No it is not the fifth floor.
Massenay
It's the first floor.
Hubertin
I shouldn't be here.
Massenay
Ah.
Hubertin
Who the devil are you? I don't know you.
Massenay
(beside himself) Oh, we just thought we'd fetch241you and play with you.
Hubertin
Well, go away.
Massenay
You go away! This is our apartment.
Francine
Creeping in here, attacking people … it's outrageous.
Hubertin
(a huge cry) Oooo-eee!
Francine / Massenay
Now what?
Hubertin
(advancing on her, beaming, with his hand outstretched) Madame Chanal!
Francine
(turning her back swiftly) Ha-h'm.
Massenay
Golly.
Hubertin
(with a drunkard's exaggerated politeness) What a delightful surprise. How are you?
Francine
(hiding behind Massenay) I'm not. I'm someone else.
Massenay
She's someone else.
Hubertin
Monsieur Chanal: how is he?
Francine
Never heard of him.
Massenay
Never heard of him. We've never heard of him. We aren't Madame Chanal.
Hubertin
I say.
Massenay
She's my wife.
Hubertin
Oh, I'm terribly sorry. You know how it is, when you've had a lil bit … not a lot, a lil bit … You see things you shouldn't. I mean, you … (Confidingly to Massenay.) You look like … (Sketching it.) a cucumber.
Massenay
Cucumber?
Hubertin
(delighted that he's got it) Entirely.
242
Massenay
Listen, you: when you've had a lil bit … you don't burst into other people's apartments.
Hubertin
But you took my door.
Massenay
What d'you mean, we took your door?
Hubertin
My key fitted it. (Getting his mouth round this with difficulty.) Fit-ted-it.
Massenay
This is ridiculous.
Francine
We'll discuss it tomorrow.
Hubertin
But Madame Chanal …
Massenay
(taking him by the arm) First, will you stop calling her Madame Chanal?
Hubertin
I don't know her first name.
Massenay
And second, will you go down to the street and fetch my clothes?
Hubertin
What clothes?
Massenay
(between his teeth) The ones you threw out of the window.
Hubertin
You really want them?
Massenay
Of course I want them. I can't go out like this.
He opens the window, leans out.
Hubertin
Whatever you say.
Massenay
Hey!
Hubertin / Francine
What?
Massenay
They've gone.
Francine
What d'you mean?
Massenay
Someone's stolen them. If they hadn't, they'd be there. They can't have stolen themselves.
243
Hubertin
(highly amused) 'Stolen themselves.' That's very funny.
Massenay
What are we going to do?
Hubertin
(sudden cry) I know.
Massenay / Francine
What?
Hubertin
Let's play a game of poker.
Francine
No!
Massenay
How much more of this. Get out of here.
Hubertin
Hey, mind your manners. I'm not being rude to you, you camel.
Massenay
Camel! Now you've gone too far. I've taught you some manners once tonight already, and now you need some more.
Francine
Go and fetch the concierge. He'll deal with this.
Massenay
You're right. (To Hubertin.) You leave me no alternative.
He puts on his top hat and strides to the door. Hubertin grins and goes to Francine.
Francine
Émile!
She hides behind Massenay. Hubertin continues to advance. At the last moment he takes out a pack of cards.
Hubertin
Are we playing or aren't we?
Massenay
NO WE ARE NOT PLAYING POKER!
Hubertin
In that case, I challenge you.
Massenay
Don't be ridiculous.
Hubertin
I'm ready when you are.
Francine
Émile! He's got a gun!
244
Massenay
Aee!
The two of them scramble down on to all fours, and make for the door.
Hubertin
Where have you gone? I can't aim straight when I've had a lil bit …
Massenay
Thank God, the door.
Francine
Well, open it. What are you waiting for?
Massenay
I can't. It's locked.
Francine
Aee.
Massenay
And my key's in my trousers, out the window.
Francine
We're at his mercy.
Massenay
Oh my Go-o-od.
Hubertin
Where are you?
Francine and Massenay hide behind furniture.
Massenay
Oh no you don't.
Francine
Have mercy. Monsieur, over here. (She waves a hand.) We'd love a game of poker. Especially with you. But I have to get dressed. You're wearing a poker-suit. I'm … in my nightie.
Hubertin
I don't mind.
Francine
It's not comfortable.
Hubertin
So take it off.
Francine
What?
Hubertin
In fact, that's a very good idea. We'll all take them off. Manners. If the lady undresses, so does the gentleman.
He takes off his jacket and waistcoat.
245
Francine
Émile! Now he's taking his clothes off.
Massenay
(rushing at him) You can't do that!
Hubertin
(throwing him the jacket and waistcoat) You always do that, for poker.
He undoes his trousers. He is still holding the gun.
Massenay
Stop it! D'you hear me, stop it! (Defeated.) Hoooo.
He puts the clothes down on a chair. Hubertin takes off his trousers.
Francine
Are you just going to stand there?
Massenay
What d'you want me to do?
Hubertin
There.
He tosses his trousers across the bed on to the floor, and stands in his long-johns. Delighted with himself, he dances a little jig, and fires the revolver accidentally into the air.
Massenay / Francine
Help!
Francine
Save me!
Massenay
And me! Save me!
They rush in all directions, like frightened rabbits.
Hubertin
(meanwhile) I say, I'm tired.
He sits on an upright chair, then collapses very slowly on it in a heap, cradling the revolver as if it were a baby. Meanwhile, oblivious to this, Francine has been shaking and banging the door, and Massenay has thrown up the window and is trying to attract attention in the street. Eventually, he turns.
Massenay
No one'll come.
Francine
The door won't budge.
Hubertin
(muttering) 'S very draughty.
Voice
(off) What's going on in there? Who's shooting guns?
246
Francine
(running to the window) It's God.
Massenay
It's the people upstairs.
Hubertin
Shut that window. 'S draughty. (He covers himself entirely with the bed-quilt.)
Massenay
(leaning to shout out of the window) Help us, please help us! Tell the concierge. Call the police. There's a maniac in here.
Voice
(off) A maniac, did you say?
Massenay
That's right, a maniac.
He mimes a maniac, out of the window. Francine sticks her head out to add her voice.
Francine
Hurry, please. Call the police.
Voice
(off) Don't go away.
Massenay closes the window. Francine is emotionally drained.
Francine
Harg, harg.
Massenay
Where's he gone?
Francine
What's the matter?
Massenay
He's vanished.
Cautiously, on all fours, they search the room, looking under chairs, picking up vases, moving cushions. Eventually they creep up on the bed-quilt from opposite sides, lift it gingerly, and find Hubertin asleep.
Massenay
Look at him!
Francine
He's asleep. Let's go.
Massenay
We haven't got the key.
Francine
The police'll be here any minute.
She starts dressing.
247
Massenay
What am I going to wear?
Francine
His clothes. He's not using them.
Massenay
That's right. Why should I care what he wears?
He searches for the clothes.
Francine
Be quick. My skirt … my skirt?
Massenay has put on Hubertin's trousers, which are short in the legs but big enough round the waist for three of him.
Massenay
My, he's a big one.
Francine
Stop parading up and down. This isn't a fashion show.
Massenay
My shoes. I need my shoes.
Francine
Under there.
Massenay
Thank God he didn't throw them out the window.
Francine
Will you get on?
Massenay
All right, all right.
He starts struggling to put his shoes on, muttering at them.
Will you get on?
Francine
Now what's the matter?
Massenay
I always use a shoe-horn.
Francine
Well, use one.
Massenay
I haven't got one.
Francine
You haven't got anything!
The speaking-tube whistles.
Eek!
Massenay
Idiot!
248
Francine
What did you say?
Massenay
Not you, the concierge. In the speaking-tube.
Another loud whistle.
Francine
Make him shut up. He'll wake the drunk one.
Massenay
(hobbling to the tube as fast as he can, his heels hanging out of his shoes) Shut up, shut, up, shut up!
He snatches the tube, whistles, then speaks in a furious whisper.
You idiot. Where have you been? Call the police. Yes, police! We're in here with a maniac. Well, I don't know. Find some. Get on with it.
He hangs up the tube.
He says where's he to get police from at this time of night. I haven't got any. Ow, these shoes.
Francine
How ridiculous, wearing evening shoes at a time like this.
Massenay
What d'you want me to wear?
Francine
I don't know. Boots, like me.
Massenay
Thanks.
Francine
This'll teach me to betray my husband.
Loud knocking at the door.
What's that now?
Massenay
I don't know.
Germal
(off) Open up, in the name of the law!
Massenay
The police.
Francine
Saved.
Massenay
(hobbling as fast as he can to the door) Inspector, at last!
249
Germal
Open up.
Massenay
(to Francine) I can't. The key.
Germal
I said, open up.
Massenay
(fawning through the door) The thing is, Inspector, the key. It's in my trousers pocket.
Germal
Well, take it out then.
Massenay
Ah! You see, my trousers are in the street outside.
He hobbles towards the window, gesturing.
Germal
A likely story.
Francine
They are, they are.
Germal
Just open this door.
Massenay
Nothing would give me greater pleasure. But … Just a minute.
He starts slapping and banging Hubertin's trousers, still bagging round him.
Massenay
(to Francine) The drunk has a key. (To the door.) Just a minute …
He tries it in the lock.
It worked for him, it should work for … ah. (Opening the door.) Inspector, do come in. This is the problem.
He gestures at Hubertin.
Germal
One moment, if you please.
He gestures to someone outside.
This way, Monsieur.
Enter Chanal.
Francine
My husband!
She jumps into the bed and covers herself entirely with the sheet.
Chanal hasn't seen her.
250
Massenay
My God!
Chanal
Massenay! It was Massenay!
Germal
No use hiding, Madame.
Chanal
It wasn't Coustillou.
Germal
Madame, you can come out now.
Francine
(uncovering herself) Did someone call me?
Chanal
(beside himself) You! You!
Francine
(with an air of the utmost innocence) 'Youyou', darling? What is the matter?
Chanal
What?
Francine
You don't imagine … just because I'm …
Chanal
Don't try to … Inspector, do your duty.
Francine
Inspector! Did you hear that, Monsieur Massenay? An inspector! He really imagines I …
Massenay
Unbelievable.
Francine
Inspector, I won't lower myself by denying it. You have your evidence.
Massenay
Now what are you doing?
Germal
Madame, you admit you're Madame Francine Chanal, wife of Monsieur Chanal?
Francine
Inspector, of course I do.
Germal
And you, Monsieur.
Massenay
Inspector, of course I do.
Germal
No, no, Monsieur: your name.
Massenay
Émile Massenay, at your service.
Germal
Massenay? Not – ?
251
Chanal
Don't be ridiculous. Does he look like – ?
Massenay
Age thirty-seven. Private income. 28, rue de Longchamp.
Germal
Both of you admit being caught here in flagrante delicto –
Francine
Of course. That … and more. Throw the book at us.
Germal
That would be strict. Flagrante'll do nicely. (To Chanal.) You agree, Monsieur?
Chanal
makes a gesture of baffled agreement.
Francine
(as if firmly in charge) Excellent. Now, Inspector, I do have to finish dressing. If you'd be so kind … ?
Germal
Madame, of course. We've all we need. If you, Madame, and you, Monsieur, would be so kind as to call at my office between one and two this afternoon, I'll have the statements prepared for signing. Monsieur Chanal, if you'll come with me …
Chanal
Inspector, at your service.
He prepares to go. He has to pass Massenay, who is still struggling with his shoes.
Chanal
You too, Monsieur.
Massenay
(crossly) In a minute.
Chanal
What do you mean, a minute?
Massenay
You haven't a shoe-horn on you?
Chanal
A shoe-horn?
Massenay
No, sorry. Sorry.
Chanal
This is no time for foolery.
Massenay
No, no. Sorry.
Chanal
Please remember your appointment: one o'clock252in the inspector's office. (At the door.) After you, Inspector.
Germal
No, no, after you.
Chanal
No, no, I insist.
Germal
Make yourself at home.
Chanal
What?
Germal
Sorry. Force of habit.
Exeunt.
Francine
Now what?
Massenay
Now what?
Francine
I hope you're satisfied. This is your fault.
Massenay
Darling, I'm heart-broken.
Francine
'Darling, I'm heart-broken.' What good does that do?
Massenay
I know. But what can I do?
He struggles with his shoes.
Francine
A gentleman would know what to do. In a perilous situation, a gentleman would gallop to protect his lady's honour.
Massenay
How? These shoes …
Francine
For heaven's sake, those shoes! If you can't find a shoe-horn, use a fork!
Massenay
A fork. How clever!
Francine
Thank you.
Massenay
There'll be one in there.
He goes to the inner room. She harries him.
Francine
What a lover you are! Doesn't even know how to use a fork!
253
Massenay goes. Hubertin stirs.
Hubertin
This chair's not comfy.
He hitches himself up, still wrapped in the quilt, and flops face-down on the bed.
Francine
I should have known! I should have known! (At the door.) What on earth is he doing? (At the inner-room door.) Aren't you ready?
Massenay
(off) I'm coming.
Francine
I'll wait downstairs.
She turns to the door again, and bumps into Coustillou, who has burst in.
Coustillou
You!
Francine
Oh, you gave me such a fright.
Coustillou
(with a sob in his throat) You, you, you.
Francine
Yes, me, me, me. Who told you I was here?
Coustillou
Your husband. He sent me. He gave me the address. He was downstairs. He said, you were up here with … with your fancy man.
He sobs.
Francine
For heaven's sake don't you start.
She goes.
Coustillou
Wait! Ow!
She's slammed the door in his face. He turns broken-heartedly into the room.
A fancy man! I can't bear it! I just can't bear it! No! No! No!
With each 'No', he pounds his fist on the bed – and on Hubertin sleeping under the quilt. Hubertin surges up.
254
Hubertin
What the devil – ?
Coustillou
Hubertin! Her fancy man! Take that!
He slaps him.
Hubertin
That does it!
He fires.
Coustillou
No! Help! No!
He rushes out. Hubertin fires a second shot after him, then crouches on the bed, en garde, like a hunter aiming at his prey.
Massenay appears from the inner room.
Massenay
He's shooting now. Help! Help!
He snatches Hubertin's hat, and stumbles out as fast as he can, dodging the non-existent bullets.
Act 3
The sitting-room of Massenay's apartment. Window (with balcony) opening on the street below. Main doors to hall, centre back; doors R and L to the servants' quarters and other rooms of the apartment. The furniture, in the latest style, includes a sofa high enough to hide underneath. There is a writing-desk and a telephone.
When the curtain rises, Marthe is on the balcony, leaning over to look down the street. It's broad daylight. Sophie is beside the window, trying to see out. She is agitated.
Sophie
There's a carriage.
Marthe
There is, Madame, you're right. That I can't deny.
Sophie
Is it Monsieur?
Marthe
That might be.
Sophie
No, it's going past.
Marthe
That is, Madame, you're right. That I can't deny.
They come into the room.
Sophie
It's awful, it's awful.
Marthe
Try to be calm, Madame. Don't upset yourself so.
Sophie
What if something's happened?
Marthe
That won't bring him home any sooner.
Sophie
Thank you. Anyone can see he's not your husband.
Marthe
Now Madame, 'No news, good news.' You know what they say. That could be good news.
Sophie
You mean I should be glad he's not home?
256
Marthe
You should not, Madame. You're right. That I can't deny.
Sophie
I could call someone. On the telephone. Who? His club. He told me he had a club. I'll get the operator, you get the number.
Marthe
Yes, Madame.
While Sophie does all that old-fashioned-telephone business, Marthe searches through the directory.
Sophie
What do they do all day? Why don't they answer?
Marthe
That's a bad time of day, Madame. The women arriving for the day shift, the night-shift men going home.
Sophie
They could surely find someone else. Little boys, for example.
Marthe
They could, Madame. You're right. That I can't deny.
Sophie
What's the number?
Marthe
There isn't one, Madame.
Sophie
What d'you mean, isn't one?
Marthe
Not under 'Club', Madame.
Sophie
It's 'Touring Club', 'Touring Club'.
Marthe
That it is, Madame. You're right. That I can't deny.
Sophie
You're doing this on purpose. Listen! Wheels! A vehicle!
Marthe
(on the balcony) That it is, Madame.
Sophie
Is Monsieur inside?
Marthe
I don't think so, Madame. That's a fish-cart.
257
She stays out there during what follows.
Sophie
This is too bad!
The phone rings.
At last! Hello. I'm sorry, I've nowhere else to turn. My husband, I've lost my husband. No, mislaid. He hasn't come home. I know it's early. It's never happened before. You don't know where he – ? No, of course. Oh, please. Thank you Monsieur.
She hangs up.
Now what are we going to do?
Enter Auguste, agitated.
Sophie
Auguste, thank goodness? Yes?
Auguste
No, Madame.
Sophie
No?
Auguste
I went everywhere you asked, Madame. Restaurants, bars. All closed. Maxim's … waiters putting out the rubbish; the drunk they were putting out … No, not Monsieur. The police station, Lost Property Office …
Sophie
He isn't lost property.
Auguste
They do Missing Persons as well. Saves money. The morgue …
Sophie
No!
Auguste
They hadn't seen Monsieur.
Sophie
Thank God.
Auguste
They said not to worry, though, it was early. I left Monsieur's description: average height, medium nose, hair nondescript, speaks three languages fluently … I left the telephone number, in case he …
Sophie
Thanks, Auguste.
258
Doorbell, off.
Auguste
Perhaps that's Monsieur.
Sophie
No, he took his key. It must be Monsieur Belgence. Let him in.
Auguste
Yes, Madame.
Exit.
Sophie
(to Marthe at the window) Still no one, Marthe?
Marthe
No, Madame. You're right. That I can't deny.
Auguste ushers in Belgence.
Sophie
Ah. You – ?
Belgence
My dear, what's wrong? Whatever's the matter?
Sophie
Thank you for coming. I'm sorry I rang you so early …
Belgence
That doesn't matter. You know I –
Sophie
I don't know what to do. I need someone to help me. My husband still isn't home.
Belgence
You said, on the phone just now. It's appalling.
Sophie
What can have happened to him? It's never happened before. Oh, he's had an accident.
Belgence
No, he hasn't. Accidents aren't like this.
Sophie
Don't spare me. He's dead. I know he's dead.
Belgence
(comforting her) There, there. There, there.
Sophie
Still nothing, Marthe?
Marthe
No, Madame.
Sophie
You see? I didn't tell her to say that.
Marthe
That's true, Madame. Nothing. That I can't deny.
259
Belgence
(playing it like a Dutch uncle) Come on, now. We're human. It's not all lost. While there's life, there's hope. We must do something.
Sophie
What do you suggest?
Belgence
I don't know, something. In fact, I've done something already. On my way here, I passed the police station. The inspector's a friend of mine: Planteloup. I said to him, 'Planteloup, no time to lose. A friend of mine's just lost her husband … mysterious circumstances …' He said, 'I'm on my way' – he won't be long. He's not brilliant, but he is a policeman.
Sophie
He's dead, oh my God, he's dead.
She flings herself sobbing on to the sofa.
Belgence
Now, now, there's no need to put yourself in such a state.
He sits and tries to comfort her.
Please. My dear. I can't bear to see you. Oh, Sophie … (Down on one knee.) Sophie, you know I've always loved you.
Sophie
(indignantly) What?
Belgence
I'm devoted to you. I didn't speak out, because you're married. But now I can say, with all my heart –
Sophie
How dare you?
Belgence
What?
Sophie
Make declarations like that at a time like this!
Belgence
I'm not making declarations.
Sophie
Enough! You've said quite enough already. What d'you take me for? Why should I listen to proposals, with my husband not even cold?
260
Belgence
You haven't. I didn't. All I meant was, I'm your slave, I'll do anything you want, you can count on me for anything.
Sophie
Ah. (Leaning her head on his breast.) Thank you. I thought … When he was hardly … he was always so fond of you.
Belgence
(touched) Dear Émile!
Sophie
Only yesterday he was saying, 'Good old Belgence. Not much up top, but a dear, dear friend.'
Belgence, moved, blows his nose, wipes away a tear.
Sophie
That was yesterday, and now today he's –
Belgence
Alas.
They sigh together. Pause. Doorbell, off.
Sophie
The bell! Marthe!
Belgence
Marthe!
Sophie
(yelling) Ma-a-a-a-a-arthe!
Marthe arrives, fast.
Sophie
Someone at the door.
Marthe
Yes, Madame.
She hurries to the hall door.
Belgence
It's probably Inspector Planteloup, from the police.
Just as Marthe gets to the door, Auguste throws it open from the other side.
Auguste
It's Inspector Planteloup, from the police.
Sophie
Show him in.
She composes herself. Enter Planteloup and Constable. Belgence goes to greet Planteloup.
261
Belgence
My dear Planteloup, you're as welcome as flowers in spring. This is the unfortunate Madame Massenay.
Planteloup
Madame, Monsieur Belgence has told me everything. You've no idea how pleased I am.
Sophie
Pardon?
Planteloup
For a police inspector, a major crime is manna from heaven. Often, it means promotion. Alas, you see, we don't all start on a level playing field. I've colleagues, in Belleville and Charonne, for example, fate smiles on them quite unfairly. Crimes, crimes, crimes, they hardly have to stir out of bed.
Sophie
Inspector –
Planteloup
I, on the other hand … this dreadful area … a drunk singing in the street is major crime.
Sophie
Inspector, I really –
Planteloup
Now at last, perhaps … the fickle finger of destiny, smiling on me, on me … Monsieur Massenay, a blameless, upright citizen, vanished overnight … dark doings at dead of night … this could be magnificent. (To the Constable.) Sit you down there, laddie. Make detailed notes. Now, Madame, in the Massenay Affair (as I think it will soon be called), the simplest theory to begin with is: murder.
Sophie
I don't know that.
Planteloup
(benignly) Of course you don't. That's what we have to prove. Our simple duty.
Sophie
(furious) Oh!
Planteloup
Now, d'you have, by any chance, a photograph?
Sophie
Of poor Émile?
Planteloup
Of poor Émile. Exactly.
262
Sophie
Just one. On his seventh birthday.
Planteloup
He'll have changed since then. How vexing. Our first setback.
He muses. Doorbell, off.
All except Planteloup
Someone's there! Someone's there!
Planteloup
Did you scream, Madame?
Sophie
Someone rang the bell. Auguste, go and see.
Auguste
Yes, Madame.
Exit.
Sophie
I'm sorry, Inspector. I'm not myself …
Planteloup
That's quite all right. We don't lose our husbands every day.
Sophie
Ah.
Planteloup
One question, Madame … of a delicate nature. If you wouldn't mind.
Sophie
No, no.
Planteloup
Did he have any little habits?
Sophie
Who, little habits?
Planteloup
Poor Émile.
Sophie
What little habits?
Planteloup
Drink, sex, gambling …
Sophie
Of course he didn't.
Planteloup
Oh, what a shame.
Sophie
What?
Planteloup
From the inquiry point of view.
Sophie
(aside to Belgence) Stop me before I slap him.
263
Belgence
(aside to her) Better not.
Enter Auguste.
Sophie
Well? Who is it?
Auguste
A roadsweeper.
All
Roadsweeper?
Auguste
With Monsieur's clothes.
All
Eh?
Sophie
What do you mean, his clothes?
Auguste
They were in the street.
All
No!
Sophie
In the street?
Belgence
Just the clothes?
Sophie
And Monsieur?
Belgence / Planteloup
And Monsieur?
Auguste
He wasn't in them.
Planteloup
Not in them, eh?
Sophie
He must have been.
Auguste
That's what the sweeper said. At least if I understood him.
Sophie
He doesn't speak French?
Auguste
Yes he does. Except when he's barking.
All
Barking?
Auguste
Barking. It's hard to follow.
Sophie
Oh, show him in.
Auguste
Yes, Madame.
Exit.
264
Sophie
We'll see about this.
Planteloup
We will indeed.
Sophie
His clothes. In the street. What's he doing?
Belgence
Walking round stark naked, by the sound of it.
Planteloup
(rubbing his hands) This gets juicier by the minute.
Sophie
(aside to Belgence) He's enjoying this.
Belgence
(aside to her) They lead very quiet lives.
Auguste fetches in Lapige, a man at peace with the world, with his street-sweeper's hat in his hand.
Auguste
In here.
Sophie
Quickly! You found the clothes?
Planteloup
Excuse me. I'll ask the questions.
Sophie
I just asked him –
Planteloup
Excuse me. This is police business.
Sophie
This is my business.
Planteloup
Madame, are you obstructing our inquiries?
Sophie
(beside herself) That does it!
She leaps for him, but is caught by Belgence in the nick of time, and taken, muttering, to sit on the sofa.
Planteloup
Over here, my man.
Lapige advances to stand in front of him.
Planteloup
You found the clothes?
Lapige is about to answer, when Planteloup turns to Sophie.
Planteloup
That was what you wanted me to ask, Madame?
265
Sophie
(ironically) It'll do, it'll do.
Planteloup
These things must be done officially, in the official manner. An amateur might let something slip, which would seriously damage the whole inquiry.
Sophie throws her arms in the air. He returns to Lapige.
Planteloup
My man: you may answer the question.
Lapige
Um … (Barking.) Ruff, ruff, ruff.
Sophie
What's he doing?
Planteloup
(warningly) Madame, please! (To Lapige.)
What are you doing?
Auguste
I told you.
Lapige
(who has been barking throughout the above) Ruff, ruff, ruff. It's all right, Madame, Messieurs. When I'm nervous, it happens, and then … (Growling like a dog.) rrrr, rrrr … it passes.
Belgence
Fascinating.
Sophie
There's nothing to be nervous about.
Planteloup
One more bark, and let's have no more of it.
Lapige
It isn't like that.
Planteloup
Well. Give your evidence.
Lapige
This morning, I was on my patch, rue du Colisée …
Sophie
Where?
Lapige
Outside number 21.
Planteloup
21 rue du Colisée. Have you got that, constable?
Lapige
I found some clothes. They belong to Monsieur Massenay, 28 rue de Longchamp. The address was in his wallet. In his pocket.
266
He hands Planteloup the things.
Planteloup
The pockets!
He, Sophie and Belgence fall on the clothes and start going through the pockets, putting the items they find on the table.
Sophie
Here's the wallet.
Planteloup
Peppermints.
Belgence
Purse. Keys.
Sophie
Gloves, clean hanky.
Planteloup
Bus timetable.
Belgence
Change.
Planteloup
Ow!
All
What?
Planteloup
A toothpick. That's sinister.
Belgence
A revolver.
Sophie
That's his.
Planteloup
It's not been fired. (To the Constable.) The deceased was taken by surprise.
Sophie
No!
Planteloup
(laying the revolver on the table) Now, my man, how did these garments get into the street?
Lapige
How should I know? All I know is they were lying in the … ruff, ruff, ruff.
Planteloup
He's doing it again.
Sophie
We noticed.
Belgence
He was doing so well.
Planteloup
Take it calmly. There boy, there boy. Lying in the … ?
267
Lapige
In the ruff, ruff.
Sophie
(trying to help him) The gutter?
Lapige
Rrr … ruff … yes.
Planteloup
'In the gutter.' That wasn't so hard. Madame said it, and she didn't bark. It's quite … When did you begin?
Lapige
Last night.
Planteloup
Not finding the clothes, barking.
Lapige
The day I was born.
Planteloup
Ah.
Lapige
Mama was frightened by a greyhound.
Planteloup
A greyhound. (To the Constable.) A greyhound.
Lapige
He climbed all over her.
Planteloup
Aha! You claim that this greyhound and your mother …
Lapige
No, no. Mama was … long before he … ruff, ruff, ruff.
Planteloup
Yes, yes. Don't start again. I understand. A fixation … (To the Constable.) a retrospective fixation.
Sophie
Never mind all that!
Planteloup
Excuse me, Madame. All evidence could be vital. (To Lapige.) Apart from the clothes, you found nothing else? Nothing that might suggest who left them there?
Lapige does one of those elaborate French shrugs.
Planteloup
Excellent. Go and sit over there. And don't bark unless you're spoken to.
268
Auguste shows Lapige to a chair, out of the way.
Planteloup
Constable, take this down. 'Conclusion after preliminary investigation of roadsweeper, in the mysterious Massenay affair …'
Sophie
Shh!
All
(whisper) What?
Sophie
I heard a key.
All
A key?
Sophie
Someone's coming.
She switches off the light. They freeze where they are. Pause. Then the door opens surreptitiously, and a hand holding a candlestick comes in.
All
(whisper) A candle, look, a candle.
The hand is followed by Massenay, dressed in top hat, long-johns and Hubertin's outsize trousers. He creeps towards one of the inner rooms, making as little noise as possible. He is interrupted by a huge shout.
All
It's him! It's him!
Light on. General rejoicing (not shared by Planteloup). Consternation of Massenay.
Sophie
Émile!
Belgence
Massenay!
Marthe / Auguste
Monsieur!
Lapige
Ruff, ruff.
Planteloup
Now then, now then.
Massenay
Good heavens, you're up already.
Sophie
You're not dead.
Massenay
Oh. Yes. How are you? My goodness, it's late.
269
Sophie
Late? What d'you mean? Coming home at this hour?
Planteloup
(striding forward) Monsieur, explain yourself.
Sophie
It's him. It's my husband. (To Massenay.) Oh, darling.
Belgence
(to Planteloup) She's right. It's him.
Planteloup
Irrelevant. Monsieur, this is highly irregular. You disappear, you're murdered, the police are called in … You can't just spring up again out of nowhere.
Massenay
Who is this man?
Sophie
A police inspector. We thought something had happened to you.
Belgence
They were opening an inquiry.
Massenay
(highly amused) I don't believe it. (To Planteloup.) Good news, Monsieur: you can close it again.
Planteloup
Just one moment. We're not puppets, you know. We don't dance just because you pull our strings.
Belgence
Planteloup, old man –
Planteloup
Stay out of it. (To Massenay.) This is a most unusual case … extremely rare …
Massenay
I'm sorry. But for me it's a matter of … life or death.
Sophie
What did happen?
Planteloup
(aggressively) That's what we'd all like to know. Explain yourself.
Massenay
Excuse me, if I explain myself to anyone, it'll be to my wife.
Sophie
Go on, then. Why are you back at this hour, and dressed like that?
270
Massenay
You noticed the clothes.
Sophie
Of course I noticed the clothes.
Planteloup
Highly irregular.
Massenay
D'you know, this candle … I think it's light enough to see by.
He blows out the candle.
Planteloup
It's been light enough to see by for three whole hours.
Massenay
(sarcastically) Thank you so much.
Sophie
Well? Well? Explain yourself.
Massenay
Fine. First of all: these aren't my clothes.
Planteloup
You're joking.
Sophie
For heaven's sake!
Massenay
You don't believe me?
Sophie
What's the explanation?
Massenay
Ah, the explanation. It's … you see … the railway company.
All
The railway company?
Auguste
(slightly out of phase with the others) – way company?
Massenay
Auguste, you've got it: the railway company. (To them all.) I must have dozed off. Forgetting the compartment was full of people. Next minute, I'm awake, and paf! They've stolen my clothes. Chloroform. They left me these … I was wearing these. They don't fit, do they?
Sophie
What rubbish! What line?
Massenay
Line, line? Oh, line. Didn't I tell you? (To Belgence.) I forgot to tell her. (To Sophie.) You'll never believe this. Calais. I've been to Calais. In these clothes, to Calais.
271
All
Calais!
Auguste
(as before) – alais!
Massenay
(to him) Exactly, Calais. I went to the station to see some people off … for Calais.
Planteloup
Highly irregular.
Massenay
What d'you mean, irregular? I bought a platform ticket. They said, 'It won't be going for ages. Come and sit down inside.' 'Oh, right. Gut, gut.' – one of them was German, the youngest one, hardly more than a boy really …
Sophie
Get on with it.
Massenay
Next minute … D'you know, they don't come round and warn you … They used to come round and warn you … The train started, and whoof!
Sophie
Whoof!
Planteloup
Amazing.
Belgence
Incredible.
Massenay
Unfortunately, it wasn't a stopping train. So: Calais I went to, Calais I came back from, paf!, these clothes … and here I am.
Planteloup
What is the world coming to?
Sophie
Poor darling.
Massenay
That's just what I kept thinking. 'Poor darling. She'll be watching. She'll be waiting …' But there was nothing I could do. None of it was my fault.
Planteloup
We believe you.
Massenay
I was asleep. The carriage was full of people.
Planteloup
Not to mention choloroform.
272
Massenay
How do you know?
Planteloup
You said so.
Massenay
There you are then. It hangs together perfectly.
Sophie
It's unbelievable.
Belgence
Unbelievable.
Planteloup
Unbelievable.
Massenay
(venting his rage on him) What d'you mean, unbelievable? What are you, an atheist?
Planteloup
Now, then. I'll be the judge of that. One other thing …
Massenay
What 'other thing'?
Planteloup
It's extraordinary. Your clothes were stolen on a train somewhere on the way to Calais, and they were picked up on the pavement of the rue du Colisée.
Massenay
Oh God.
Sophie
He's right, you know.
Belgence
So he is.
Massenay
You mean, someone … ?
Planteloup
My friend, exactly.
Massenay
On the … on the … ?
Planteloup
Exactly: on the.
Massenay
Well, well, well, well, well, well.
Planteloup
Weren't expecting that, were we?
Massenay
What d'you mean, 'were we'?
Planteloup
And the explanation?
Massenay
I … It … it's obvious. The train … the robbers … communication cord … it was a stopping train!
273
Planteloup
And there we have it.
Massenay
Are you calling me a liar?
Belgence
Émile, keep calm.
Massenay
He's getting on my nerves.
Planteloup
(equally cross, squaring up to him) Now, then!
Belgence / Sophie
(trying to calm Massenay) Émile!
Massenay
How should I know how my clothes got into the rue du Colisée? I wasn't in them, was I?
Planteloup
Precisely.
Massenay
In any case, who found them?
Planteloup / Sophie / Belgence
He did.
Massenay
(to Lapige) You did. Fine. You can tell them. Was I in them?
Lapige
Um … ruff, ruff, ruff, ruff, ruff.
Massenay
Pardon?
Lapige
Ruff.
Massenay
What are you barking for? I didn't ask for barking. I asked if I was in them.
Lapige
Rrrr … rrrrr … No.
Massenay
(triumphant) You see? Rrr, no. We were separated. Not my responsibility. In any case, who cares? Your business, not mine. Police business, not my business.
Planteloup
Just you wait. (To the Constable.) Mark this one 'Urgent'.
Massenay
Mark it any way you like. Now, if you'll excuse me, since you've found my clothes …
He starts gathering them up.
274
Planteloup
Leave those alone.
Massenay
They're mine.
Planteloup
They're evidence. Not to be tampered with.
Massenay
(tugging) Excuse me.
Planteloup
(tugging) Excuse me.
Mêlée. Massenay is left with nothing but his hat and his hankie.
Massenay
Well, thanks. Not content with sticking his nose in where it doesn't belong, he snaffles my best suit.
Planteloup
(huge) What did you say?
Belgence
(trying to calm Massenay) Émile, calm down.
Massenay
(turning him and pushing him away) You stay out of it.
Belgence
(trying to calm Planteloup) Planteloup, calm down.
Planteloup
(same gesture as Massenay) You calm down.
He turns his back and sulks.
Massenay
What idiot brought him here in the first place?
Planteloup
(turning, furious) What did you say?
Belgence
(pacifying, penitent) I did. Sorry.
Massenay
I should think you're sorry. Take him back where you found him.
Planteloup
What did you say?
Massenay
I wasn't talking to you.
Planteloup
Well, I'm talking to you, and I'm telling you your behaviour has been most suspicious from start to finish.
Massenay
From start – ?
275
Planteloup
– to finish!
Sophie
Belgence, stop them!
Belgence
Planteloup, old chap, listen …
Planteloup
I will not listen! I am not an old chap. I'm an officer of the law. You, sweeper, follow me.
Lapige tags at his heels like a faithful hound. Planteloup rounds on Massenay.
Planteloup
And you: hold yourself at the disposition of the law.
Belgence
Planteloup!
Planteloup
Not listening! Come on, you!
He whirls to summon Lapige, not realising that Lapige is right behind him. He treads hard on his foot. Lapige retreats, whimpering like a dog.
Lapige
A-hoo, a-hoo.
Planteloup
Oh, never mind your paw … your foot. Get out of the way.
Lapige
A-hoo, a-hoo. A-hoo.
Massenay
Throw him a bone, why don't you?
Planteloup storms out, pushing Lapige and followed by the Constable and Belgence. Massenay sees them to the door, slams it behind them, then comes downstage, still raging.
Massenay
What a brute! What a total brute!
Sophie
Never mind him. Only one thing matters: you're here, you're back.
Massenay
(taking her in his arms) Darling.
Auguste
Ahem. Monsieur …
Massenay
Ah. Fetch me something to wear. Marthe, a cup of tea, with rum.
276
Marthe
Yes, Monsieur.
Exeunt Auguste and Marthe.
Sophie
Oh darling, I thought I was going mad. I couldn't know about Calais, could I?
Massenay
Oh no.
Sophie
I'm glad I was so worried. It's good for you. You don't know the value of the husband you have till you haven't got him.
Massenay
Seems a bit hard.
Enter Auguste with clothes.
Auguste
Here you are, Monsieur.
Massenay
Thank you.
He starts changing, behind the sofa, helped by Auguste. Enter Marthe.
Marthe
Your tea, Monsieur.
Massenay
Put it over there.
Marthe
Yes, Monsieur.
She puts it down and exit. The phone rings.
Sophie
Auguste …
Auguste
Yes, Madame. (Answering the phone.) Hello. Yes. Ah, yes. Mm.
Massenay
Who is it?
Auguste
The morgue, Monsieur.
Massenay
The morgue?
Auguste
Oh yes, Monsieur. (On the phone.) Beg pardon? Fished him out?
Massenay
Fished who out?
Auguste
Monsieur, Monsieur.
277
Massenay
Me?
Auguste
In an advanced stage of decomposition.
Sophie
Darling, no!
Massenay
They're out of their minds.
Auguste
What shall I tell them?
Massenay
Tell them they're mad. No, just a minute. (Taking the phone.) Good morning. My manservant tells me you … Ah. No, it can't be. This is me, here. In person. What? How d'you mean, can you get rid of it? I don't know. So far as I' m concerned. Do what you like with it. Pardon? No, no, a pleasure. Thank you. (Hanging up.) They're so polite. 'At your service, any time, day or night.' They're so polite.
Sophie
What an adventure.
Massenay
Ab-solutely. (Stretching luxuriously.) It's so nice to be home again. Catch your breath, relax …
Noise of someone clumping in the hall, nearer and nearer.
Massenay / Sophie
Now what?
Marthe
(off) You can't! Stop that! Don't put your hands on me.
Hubertin
(off) Don't be shilly.
Massenay
It's a nightmare.
Marthe
(off) What are you doing?
Sophie
(rushing to Massenay) Émile, what is it?
Massenay
No idea.
Marthe bursts in.
Marthe
Monsieur! Help! A drunk, Monsieur.
Sophie
What d'you mean, a drunk?
Marthe
He … Oh Madame, he …
278
Sophie
What?
Marthe
He grabbed my …
Sophie
Did he?
Marthe
That I can't deny, Madame.
Massenay
(to himself, pacing) Not Hubertin. Not him again.
Sophie
Émile. Go and see. Throw him out.
Massenay
Ab-solutely.
He braces himself to stride to the rescue.
Sophie
Not by yourself. Auguste! Au-guste!
Enter Auguste, fast.
Auguste
Yes, Madame?
Sophie
Quick. There's a drunk.
Auguste
A drunk?
Sophie
Help Monsieur.
Massenay
This way.
He strides out. Auguste follows.
Auguste
Whatever next?
He's gone.
Sophie
What a day. What a dreadful day.
Marthe
Yes, Madame. That I can't de –
Hubertin bursts in, by an inner door.
Marthe
Aah!
She rushes out, R.
Sophie
Aah!
She rushes out L. Hubertin stands there. He is wearing his279mackintosh and a top hat, but apparently nothing else.
Hubertin
Don't be frightened, lil turtle doves. It's me. It's Hubertin. Women are such babies.
He finds the teacup.
How thoughtful. With a head like this, just what I need.
He picks up a spoonful of sugar, then pours it back.
No, no. You take tea neat.
He drains the cup, smacks his lips.
My, that was neat. (Pause.) Cold, mind …
Auguste and Massenay burst in.
Auguste
In here, Monsieur.
Massenay
(very high horse) In here, are you? Fine. Get out.
Hubertin
Now, now, now, now, now. No need to shout.
Massenay
I'll set my man on you.
Auguste makes a deprecating gesture, moves out of range.
Hubertin
Émile.
Massenay
How dare you? 'Émile' – how dare you? We haven't been introduced.
Hubertin
(twisting with embarrassment) I'm sorry.
He collapses on the sofa.
Massenay
For heaven's sake!
Hubertin
I say …
Massenay
Don't bother.
Hubertin
(putting up his hand like a schoolchild) Please, sir.
Massenay
You can't.
280
Hubertin
One question, then I'll go.
Massenay
Oh. Get on with it.
Hubertin
(getting up and lurching towards him) Why did you take my clothes?
Auguste
What did you say?
Massenay
(quickly) How dare you? Me?
Hubertin collapses on Massenay, who holds him up like a man propping up a collapsing building.
Hubertin
When I looked for them, they'd gone.
Auguste
Those clothes were yours?
Massenay
(struggling to keep Hubertin upright) Don't be ridiculous. Mind your own business. Of course they weren't his. They came from Calais.
Hubertin
Don't be nasty. Gaby said I had to come. 'Get out,' thass what she said, 'and don't come back till you've found them,' thass what she said.
Massenay
Fine. I'll give you clothes. No problem. If you just go away.
Hubertin signs that he will.
Massenay
Cross your heart?
Hubertin
(with enormous, drunken force) An … hope … to … die! Spit … in … your … eye!
He takes one of Massenay's hands, spits in his own, and shakes it.
Massenay
Thanks very much.
He pushes him off. Hubertin falls back on the sofa.
Hubertin
Time for bed again.
Massenay
Who told you this address?
Hubertin
Shh! The con-ci-erge.
281
Massenay
I'll have a word with him later.
Enter Sophie.
Sophie
Has he gone?
Massenay
My wife, now.
Hubertin
(getting up and attempting a bow) Madame, I –
Sophie
Him!
Massenay
(pushing Hubertin back down) That's enough.
Hubertin
Ow.
Sophie
You're all alone with him? He hasn't hurt you?
Massenay
He's perfectly tame. It's all right. Go.
Sophie
And leave you alone with him? I won't.
Hubertin
(surging to his feet again, very man-of-the-world) Forgettin my manners, entirely. Still wearing hatancoat.
Massenay
Don't start.
Hubertin
Not in a sittin room.
He takes off the hat and starts unbuttoning the raincoat.
Massenay
It's quite all right.
Hubertin
No, no, no, no, no. Manners.
He takes off the coat and is revealed in long-johns.
Sophie
My God.
Massenay
For heaven's sake.
Sophie
He's undressed.
Massenay
And well away.
Hubertin
(throwing the hat and coat at Auguste) Be kind enough to deal with these, my man.
Auguste
(as they fall all over him) Yerk.
282
Massenay
(at the top of his voice) What are you playing at? My wife's here.
Hubertin
(matching him for volume) Where is she, then?
Massenay
She's there.
Hubertin
That's not your wife. I met your wife last night.
Sophie
Pardon?
Hubertin
What are you, a serial husband?
Massenay
(aside) Trouble brewing.
Sophie
What's he talking about? What's he mean, 'I met your wife last night'?
Massenay
Don't listen to him. He's drunk. He doesn't know what he's saying. Fantasy, feverish fantasy … (To Hubertin.) Pig, sot, oaf, will you shut your mouth and get out of here?
Hubertin
You sound just like my wife.
Massenay
If you're always like this, I'm not surprised.
Hubertin
(hugely contrite) You're absolutely right. I'm unworthy. A walking disaster. Not fit to lick your boots.
Massenay
I should think you aren't.
Hubertin
(tearfully) I drink. I come home late. I murder.
Massenay / Sophie / Auguste
Arg!
Hubertin
I should never have killed him.
Sophie
No.
Auguste
You?
Massenay
Who?
Hubertin
A bigshot. An MP. A Coustillou.
283
Sophie
He murdered Coustillou.
Massenay
No, he didn't.
Hubertin
I did. And you. I murdered you.
Massenay
You didn't.
Hubertin
(breaking down completely) I did. You're just being polite, you don't want to embarrass me, but I know you're dead. I'm sorry!
He flings himself, sobbing, on Massenay, who staggers.
Massenay
Thanks. No. It's quite all … (Aside, as he manoeuvres him to a chair.) Now we'll never get rid of him.
Hubertin
I was lying in bed. He smacked my bottom. I reached out my arm, like this …
He stretches out his hand, and finds Massenay's gun on the table.
Hubertin
I fired. Bang … bang … bang … bang …
With each 'bang', he fires a real shot. Total panic. Everyone ducks behind furniture for cover.
Sophie
He's shooting!
Massenay
Take cover!
Auguste
Help!
Marthe rushes in.
Marthe
What's happening?
Hubertin
Bang!
He shoots again. Marthe and Sophie panic, rush for safety to the same place, collide, then rush out in opposite directions, waving their arms and panicking.
Hubertin
I'm finished. Done for. I don't deserve to live.
He slumps and sobs. His arm droops over the arm of the chair.
The gun falls to the ground, unnoticed. Pause. Then Massenay gingerly cocks an eye from his hiding place, round the corner of the sofa.
284
Massenay
Has he finished?
Auguste
(popping his head round the piece of furniture he's hiding behind) Who is he, Monsieur?
They approach each other, on their knees, for a whispered conference.
Massenay
I've no idea. It's bad he's here, that's all I know. Very, very bad.
Auguste
He mustn't stay here. Too dangerous. He'll have to be dealt with.
Massenay
Do you know how?
Auguste
The gun. He's dropped the gun.
Massenay
Pass it over.
Auguste hurries over on his knees and passes it, unseen by the sobbing heap that is Hubertin.
Auguste
There, Monsieur.
He gets up and starts shaking Hubertin.
Auguste
Come on, you. Stop sobbing on our sofa.
Hubertin
(lifting his tearful face) Leave me. I'll sob myself to death.
He drops his head as before.
Massenay
No one's stopping you. But you're not doing it here. Out, now, or take the consequences.
Hubertin
That's right. Show no mercy. I deserve it.
Massenay
(waving the revolver about) This gun is loaded, and I'm not afraid to use it.
Hubertin
Use it. I beg you. End me. It won't hurt: when I've had a lil drink, I don't feel pain.
285
Massenay
(to Auguste) Now what? I can't just shoot him.
Hubertin
Pull the trigger.
Massenay
Oh, don't worry. I intend to.
Hubertin
What are you waiting for?
Massenay
(raging) None of your business. I'm in charge. I'll shoot when I'm good and ready. It's not for you to tell me when to shoot.
Hubertin
I haven't the patience. You, footman, a brandy and soda. I'm thirsty here.
Massenay
That does it. Now you've gone too far. Auguste, take this … specimen and throw him down the stairs.
Auguste
Me, Monsieur?
Massenay
Yes. You.
Auguste
(aside to him) I can't. He's big.
Massenay
(aside) I'll help you. When I say 'piccolo' grab his shoulders. I'll get his legs.
Auguste
(aside) 'Piccolo'?
Massenay
(aside) Yes. (Huge.) 'Piccolo!'
They grab Hubertin.
Hubertin
What are you doing?
Massenay
Mind your own business. (To Auguste.) You see? It's easy.
Auguste
Easy for you, Monsieur. You've got the easy end. (Staggering.) I don't think I can hold him.
Massenay
Don't be such a baby.
Auguste
I can't. It's no good.
He drops his end.
286
Massenay
We were so close …
Hubertin
(on the floor) Upsy-daisy, all fall down.
Massenay
Will you be quiet?
Sophie nervously puts her head in.
Sophie
All right?
Massenay
We're seeing to it. Don't worry.
Sophie
He's here, still here? Oh no.
Massenay
We're seeing to it.
Sophie
He hasn't hurt anyone?
Massenay
Of course he hasn't. (To Auguste.) There's nothing for it: fetch removing men.
Hubertin
And a brandy and soda while you're at it.
Auguste
(to Massenay) Monsieur … ?
Massenay
Yes, yes, anything.
Auguste
Yes, Monsieur.
He ducks round the table, and appears before Hubertin, very formal.
Auguste
Ahem. Monsieur's brandy and soda.
Hubertin
(getting to his feet, eyes fixed ahead, like a dog on the scent) A-ha!
Massenay
Genius, Auguste.
Hubertin
Where is it, then?
Auguste
(opening the door to the kitchen) This way, Monsieur. No, no, after you, Monsieur.
Hubertin
One brandy and soda, any minute now.
Exit.
Auguste
Hey presto.
287
Massenay / Sophie
Auguste, you're wonderful.
Auguste
It's just a knack.
Massenay
Get his hat and his coat on, and throw him down the backstairs.
Auguste
Of course, Monsieur.
He takes Hubertin's hat and coat, and exit.
Massenay
Boy oh boy oh boy oh boy oh boy.
Sophie
What a morning.
Massenay
Whatever next?
Doorbell, off.
Sophie
(starting) A visitor.
Massenay
More disaster.
Sophie
Don't say that.
Marthe
(putting her head nervously round the door) Is that … has he … ?
Massenay
What is it?
Marthe
Nothing. Just …
Massenay
Just what?
Marthe
Monsieur Coustillou's here.
Massenay gazes aside at the audience: stunned bewilderment.
Sophie
Show him in.
Massenay
(snapping out of it) What? No! You can't.
Sophie
Why not?
Massenay
I … we … he … Sorry. (To Marthe.) Show him in.
Marthe
(off) This way, Monsieur.
Massenay
(aside) He knows!
288
Coustillou enters, strides over to him with furrowed brow and agitated manner.
Coustillou
I've got to talk to you.
Massenay
Have you?
Sophie
What on earth's the matter?
Coustillou
Nothing. I … Madame.
He recovers his poise, shakes her hand.
Madame, good morning. I'm sorry, I was rather …
Sophie
And so are we! Imagine, a drunk, here in the –
Coustillou
Oh, I do agree, Madame. (To Massenay, urgently.) You've got to help me. I'm fighting a duel.
Massenay
You are?
Sophie
You, Monsieur?
Coustillou
I can't tell you why. Later … if the press get to hear of it … It doesn't matter why. A fellow called Hubertin.
Massenay
(without thinking) Not him again.
Coustillou
You know him?
Massenay
(firmly) Never heard of him.
Sophie
I don't think we've ever met a Hubertin.
Coustillou
You're lucky, let me tell you. He's a … he's an absolute …
Sophie
Like our drunk. The drunk we had in here just now.
Coustillou
(not taking this in at all) I'll show him. Oh, I'll show him.
He paces, nervously and furiously.
Massenay
Calm down.
289
Enter Auguste.
Auguste
All right so far, Monsieur. He's in the kitchen. He's got his clothes on.
Massenay
Oh, God. Shh! Shh!
Auguste
(who hasn't noticed) He told me his name. It's Hubertin.
Massenay
(trying to drown this out) Allons, enfants de la pat –
But Coustillou has grabbed Auguste by the lapels and is shaking him like a plum tree.
Coustillou
What did you say?
Auguste
Monsieur, Monsieur.
Coustillou
Did you say Hubertin?
Massenay
Don't be ridiculous. You're besotted. You're dreaming. Vertin. He said Vertin.
Coustillou
Vertin?
Massenay
Exactly. Monsieur Hugh Vertin. (To Auguste.) Didn't you? Didn't you?
Auguste
Yes, Monsieur.
Coustillou
Who is this Vertin?
Massenay
Nobody. Nobody at all. A drunk, a tramp. We give him clothes. In the kitchen. Doesn't everyone have tramps?
Coustillou
I don't.
Massenay
Well, we do.
Coustillou
It's very odd.
Massenay
Not in the least. Auguste, send the poor, dear fellow on his way. (Aside to him.) And tell me when.
Auguste
(to him) The thing is, Monsieur, he wants to290play poker.
Massenay
Fine. Play.
Auguste
I don't know how to.
Massenay
You can play snap, can't you? Let him play poker, you play snap. He's so drunk he won't know the difference. Get on with it.
Auguste
If you say so, Monsieur.
Doorbell, off. He goes.
Massenay
Someone else, now.
Coustillou
Look, before they … I mean, I …
Massenay
In a minute. Can't you see I'm busy?
Sophie
What's happening now?
Massenay
Nothing. An appointment. Take Coustillou in there. I'll deal with them. (To Coustillou.) Five minutes. I'll deal with them.
Coustillou
I suppose so.
Sophie
This way, Monsieur.
Coustillou
(to Massenay, as he passes) Just get on with it, that's all.
Massenay
Of course. (Aside to Sophie.) Don't mention the drunk.
Sophie
Don't worry. (To Coustillou.) This way, Monsieur.
Exeunt.
Massenay
(almost beside himself) What else can go wrong?
Enter Chanal.
Chanal
I'm not disturbing you?
Massenay
What? No … no …
291
Chanal turns back to the door.
Chanal
This way, Francine.
Enter Francine. She is formal and distant with Massenay.
Massenay
Madame.
Chanal
Oh, call her Francine. If I wasn't here, you'd call her Francine. Don't not call her Francine on my account.
Massenay
(highly embarrassed) Look, Alcide, I know what you're saying. I know you're angry. I mean, I want to –
Chanal
Me, angry? Whatever for? Because you and my wife … ? Why should I be angry? I mean, because you like her? Why shouldn't you? I like her.
Massenay
I … we … hum …
Chanal
No, no, no, no, no. We must be pliable. Pliable. Especially when there's no alternative. (To Francine.) Do sit down, my darling. There's absolutely no need to stand.
Massenay
Alcide, I … you … I don't know what to say.
Chanal
Don't say a word. I won't deny, when I first heard about this, I saw red. If you'd been there, the pair of you, I'd have wrung your necks. But you weren't there. I could hardly wring necks that were somewhere else. So I started thinking. 'My dear old boy,' I said to myself, 'it's happened. You've become a –'
Francine
Alcide!
Massenay
Don't say it!
Chanal
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. These things must be faced. 'My dear old boy, it's happened. Nothing you can do about it. Put a good face on it.'
Massenay
Oh!
Chanal
'After all, they didn't do it to annoy you.'
292
Massenay / Francine
(quickly) Of course not.
Chanal
And if you didn't do it to annoy me, it must be because you're in love. And who am I to say no, when heaven says yes?
Massenay
Oh Alcide!
Chanal
So. I'll tell you what I've decided. (Sharply to him.) Sit down there. (Back to his first tone.) I'm going to court.
Massenay
What?
Chanal
I mean, I have to think of my own position.
Massenay
Oh. Yes.
Chanal
It won't be a big case. A little one. Domestic. Nothing cosmic.
Massenay
Happens all the time.
Chanal
We'll leave you out of it. I'll have to name Francine, naturally, but we'll leave you out of it. Asterisk asterisk asterisk, that's what you'll be.
Massenay
How kind you are.
Chanal
Come on! Just because I have a tiny domestic disaster, doesn't mean I have to be vindictive. This isn't about my happiness. It's about you! Your happiness. Your dear wife's happiness.
Massenay
How kind you are.
Chanal
If two people want to be happy, who am I to shatter their dream for ever?
Massenay
You're a saint, a saint. (To Francine.) Isn't he a saint?
Francine
A saint.
Chanal
No, really, I'm not. Marriage, to me, is like standing on the bridge of a great ocean liner. Putting into293harbour. You've piloted across the swelling ocean, and now you're putting into harbour. The pilot comes aboard, and you stand there, smiling benignly. You show him the wheel, and say, 'There you are, old boy. She's all yours. Take her.'
Massenay
What d'you mean, 'She's all yours, take her'?
Chanal
My wife, for heaven's sake. She's all yours. Take her.
Massenay
What?
Chanal
After all, you are going to marry her.
Massenay
Me? Your wife? You're crazy.
Chanal
(innocently) I'm sorry – ?
Massenay
I can't marry your wife. I'm married already.
Chanal
(feigning utter surprise) You're not! You? Married?
Massenay
Of course I'm married.
Chanal
How very awkward.
Massenay
Cha!
He paces. Chanal goes imperturbably to Francine, taps her shoulder.
Chanal
How very awkward.
Massenay
(coming down to him) I mean, if I wasn't, she'd be the first I'd … I mean, I'd …
Chanal
This is very awkward. Married, eh?
Massenay
(trying to shrug it off with ruefulness) What can one do?
Chanal
I know what you mean. (New tone.) Still, none of my business.
294
Massenay
What?
Chanal
I mean, you were married already, when you … when you and my wife … You should have thought of this then.
Massenay
(nettled) What d'you mean, this then? What d'you want me to do? I'm not a bigamist.
Chanal
So where does that leave us? I know: divorce.
Massenay
I don't believe this.
Chanal
It's only polite. If a chap breaks up another chap's marriage, he marries the wife. It's simply what one does.
Massenay
I'm married already! What am I to tell my wife?
Chanal
Truth's always best.
Massenay
(beside himself) I will not tell my wife the truth.
Chanal
Awkward, is it, for you? Would you like me to … ?
Massenay
(furious) No I would not … (Controlling himself.) No, thank you.
Chanal
It's up to you. The choice is yours. Behave like a gentleman, look the world in the eye and say, 'I honoured the Code', or be taken to court and show everyone you're a crocodile.
Massenay
This is blackmail.
Chanal
I say, so it is. Well? Have you decided?
Enter Marthe.
Marthe
Monsieur …
Massenay
What is it now?
Marthe
The porters are here with the bags.
295
Massenay
What bags?
Chanal
It's all right. I know. (To Marthe.) Tell them to bring them in.
Exit Marthe.
Chanal
My wife's bags.
Massenay
WHAT?
Chanal
They're bringing her bags. So tell me. Which way is her bedroom?
Massenay
She hasn't got a bedroom!
Marthe throws open the double doors, and a stream of Porters starts fetching in bags of varying sizes.
Massenay
Get these out of here! Out! Out! Out!
Chanal
It's all right. Leave them.
Massenay
What d'you mean, leave them? (To the Porters.) Take them out!
Chanal
Leave them.
He gives the Porters money, shoos them out and closes the doors.
Massenay
(completely walled in by bags) What are you playing at?
Chanal
What are you playing at?
Massenay
Don't take that tone with me!
Enter Sophie.
Sophie
What's all the noise about?
Massenay
(aside) My God, my wife.
Sophie
(taking in the scene) What's happening?
Massenay
Monsieur Chanal, my wife. (Introducing Francine and Sophie.) My wife … Madame Chanal. (Smiling like a maniac.) Well, isn't this nice?
296
Sophie
Whose are all these bags?
Massenay
What bags?
Sophie
Those bags.
Massenay
Oh, these? They're … bags.
Chanal
(calmly) They're my wife's bags.
Massenay
(aside) Help me!
Sophie
(to Massenay) His wife's bags?
Massenay
Good heavens, so they are.
Chanal
(aside to him, charmingly) Shall I tell her now?
Massenay
No! Don't!
Chanal
Up to you, then.
Sophie
What's happening?
Massenay
Ha, ha. Nothing at all. Nothing much at all.
Sophie
What?
Massenay
Well. My friend Chanal. My dear old friend, Chanal. My old school friend, Chanal. (Giving him one of those schoolboy mock-punches.) Good old Chanal. He's here in Paris for a day or two, with his … with his … with his bags.
Chanal
No I'm not.
Massenay
You are.
Chanal
I'm not.
Massenay
I say you are.
Chanal
You're completely mistaken. (To Sophie.) The thing is: Madame –
Massenay
Will you shut up?
Chanal
What d'you mean?
297
Massenay
You know exactly what I mean.
Chanal
Don't be ridiculous.
Massenay
Me, ridiculous?
Sophie
Just a minute …
A huge row develops, all three talking at the tops of their voice. Francine sits aside from it all, as she's done ever since she came in. At the height of the argument, enter Coustillou.
Coustillou
I say. I am still here.
Massenay
(rounding on him) You, now! Get out of here! Get out!
He pushes him down on the sofa next to Francine, indeed almost on top of her. Extreme embarrassment of Coustillou.
Coustillou
You. Madame, I … you … hoo … harg …
Massenay grabs him to his feet and bundles him out by the servants' door.
Massenay
I told you to get out of here!
Huge row and clatter from the next room. Shouting, breaking crockery, clanging pots and pans.
My God, I put him in the kitchen. With Hubertin!
The row escalates, until Coustillou is projected into the room, his clothes torn, his hat in ribbons. Hubertin follows him, fully dressed, pummelling and pushing him like a whirlwind.
All
Ah!
Coustillou
Stop it! Help! Help!
Hubertin
Rat! Camel! Politician!
He yanks Coustillou's hat down over his eyes, gives him a last kick in the pants, and stalks to the door.
Hubertin
You've not heard the end of this!
298
Exit.
Sophie
(going to Coustillou) Monsieur Coustillou!
Coustillou
(panting, exhausted) Harg, harg, what was that?
Sophie
It's all right.
Coustillou
It was worse than Parliament.
Auguste
(at the door, announcing) Inspector Planteloup.
Sophie
So soon?
Massenay
What does he want?
Planteloup bursts in in a fury.
Planteloup
Monsieur Massenay, you played fast and loose with me.
All
Eh?
Planteloup
Your trip to Calais was a blind. You were arrested last night in the rue du Colisée, in bed with the wife of someone called Chanal.
Coustillou
You mean it was him … ?
Sophie
What did you say?
Chanal
It had to happen.
Sophie
(confronting Massenay) Arrested? Last night? In bed with … ? Ha!
She slaps him so that he falls on the sofa.
Massenay
That hurt.
Sophie
Don't talk to me. All's over between us.
Massenay
Sophie!
Sophie
Don't ever speak to me again. Inspector, this way.
Planteloup
Certainly, Madame.
299
Exeunt.
Massenay
(getting up and going to Coustillou) It's not what it seems.
Coustillou
The lover … was you!
Massenay
What of it?
Coustillou
This, Monsieur.
He slaps him.
Massenay
What's it got to do with … you?
He slaps him back.
Coustillou
That does it. I challenge you.
Massenay
No, I challenge you.
Too late. Coustillou has stalked out.
Chanal
So there we are, old man. She's all yours.
Upstage centre high double window open on bright night sky. Moon invisible.
Downstage audience left, equidistant from wall and axis of window, small table and chair. On table an extinguished reading-lamp and a briefcase crammed with documents.
Downstage right, forming symmetry, identical table and chair.
Extinguished lamp only.
Downstage left door.
Standing motionless before left half of window with his back to stage, C.
Long pause.
Enter A. He closes door, goes to table on right and sits with his back to right wall. Pause. He switches on lamp, takes out his watch, consults it and lays it on the table. Pause. He switches off.
Long pause.
Enter B. He closes door, goes to table on left and sits with his back to left wall. Pause. He switches on lamp, opens briefcase and empties contents on table. He looks round, sees A.
B
Well!
A
Hsst! Switch off. (B switches off. Long pause. Low.) What a night! (Long pause. Musing.) I still don't understand. (Pause.) Why he needs our services. (Pause.) A man like him. (Pause.) And why we give them free. (Pause.) Men like us. (Pause.) Mystery. (Pause.) Ah well… (Pause. He switches on.) Shall we go? (B switches on, rummages in his papers.) The crux. (B rummages.) We sum up and clear out. (B rummages.) Set to go?
B
Rearing.
A
We attend.
26
B
Let him jump.
A
When?
B
Now.
A
From where?
B
From here will do. Three to three and a half metres per floor, say twenty-five in all.
Pause.
A
I could have sworn we were only on the sixth. (Pause.) He runs no risk?
B
He has only to land on his arse, the way he lived. The spine snaps and the tripes explode.
Pause. A gets up, goes to the window, leans out, looks down. He straightens up, looks at the sky. Pause. He goes back to his seat.
A
Full moon.
B
Not quite. Tomorrow.
A takes a little diary from his pocket.
A
What's the date?
B
Twenty-fourth. Twenty-fifth tomorrow.
A
(Turning pages.) Nineteen… twenty-two… twenty-four. (Reads.) 'Our Lady of Succour. Full moon.' (He puts back the diary in his pocket.) We were saying then… what was it… let him jump. Our conclusion. Right?
B
Work, family, third fatherland, cunt, finances, art and nature, heart and conscience, health, housing conditions, God and man, so many disasters.
Pause.
A
(Meditative.) Does it follow? (Pause.) Does it follow? (Pause.) And his sense of humour? Of proportion?
B
Swamped.
Pause.
A
May we not be mistaken?
B
(Indignant.) We have been to the best sources. All weighed and weighed again, checked and verified. Not a word here (brandishing sheaf of papers) that is not cast iron. Tied together like a cathedral. (He flings down the papers on the table. They scatter on the floor.) Shit!
27
He picks them up. A raises his lamp and shines it about him.
A
Seen worse dumps. (Turning towards window.) Worse outlooks. (Pause.) Is that Jupiter we see?
Pause.
B
Where?
A
Switch off. (They switch off.) It must be.
B
(Irritated.) Where?
A
(Irritated.) There. (B cranes.) There, on the right, in the corner.
Pause.
B
No. It twinkles.
A
What is it then?
B
(Indifferent.) No idea. Sirius. (He switches on.) Well? Do we work or play? (A switches on.) You forget this is not his home. He's only here to take care of the cat. At the end of the month shoosh back to the barge. (Pause. Louder.) You forget this is not his home.
A
(Irritated.) I forget, I forget! And he, does he not forget? (With passion.) But that's what saves us!
B
(Searching through his papers.) Memory… memory… (He takes up a sheet.) I quote: 'An elephant's for the eating cares, a sparrow's for the Lydian airs.' Testimony of Mr Swell, organist at Seaton Sluice and lifelong friend.
Pause.
A
(Glum.) Tsstss!
B
I quote: 'Questioned on this occasion' —open brackets—'(judicial separation)' —close brackets—'regarding the deterioration of our relations, all he could adduce was the five or six miscarriages which clouded' —open brackets—'(oh through no act of mine!)' —close brackets—'the early days of our union and the veto which in consequence I had finally to oppose' —open brackets—'(oh not for want of inclination!)' —close brackets—'to anything remotely resembling the work of love. But on the subject of our happiness' —open brackets—'(for it too came our way, unavoidably, and here my mind goes back to the first vows 28exchanged at Wootton Bassett under the bastard acacias, or again to the first fifteen minutes of our wedding night at Littlestone-on-Sea, or yet again to those first long studious evenings in our nest on Commercial Road East)' —close brackets—'on the subject of our happiness not a word, Sir, not one word.' Testimony of Mrs Aspasia Budd-Croker, button designer in residence, Commercial Road East.
A
(Glum.) Tsstss!
B
I quote again: 'Of our national epos he remembered only the calamities, which did not prevent him from winning a minor scholarship in the subject.' Testimony of Mr Peaberry, market gardener in the Deeping Fens and lifelong friend. (Pause.) 'Not a tear was known to fall in our family, and God knows they did in torrents, that was not caught up and piously preserved in that inexhaustible reservoir of sorrow, with the date, the hour and the occasion, and not a joy, fortunately they were few, that was not on the contrary irrevocably dissolved, as by a corrosive. In that he took after me.' Testimony of the late Mrs Darcy-Croker, woman of letters. (Pause.) Care for more?
A
Enough.
B
I quote: 'To hear him talk about his life, after a glass or two, you would have thought he had never set foot outside hell. He had us in stitches. I worked it up into a skit that went down well.' Testimony of Mr Moore, light comedian, c/o Widow Merryweather-Moore, All Saints on the Wash, and lifelong friend.
Pause.
A
(Stricken.) Tsstss! (Pause.) Tsstsstss!
B
You see. (Emphatic.) This is not his home and he knows it full well.
Pause.
A
Now let's have the positive elements.
B
Positive? You mean of a nature to make him think… (hesitates, then with sudden violence) …that some day 29things might change? Is that what you want? (Pause. Calmer.) There are none.
A
(Wearily.) Oh yes there are, that's the beauty of it. (Pause. B rummages in his papers.)
B
(Looking up.) Forgive me, Bertrand. (Pause. Rummages. Looks up.) I don't know what came over me.
(Pause. Rummages. Looks up.) A moment of consternation.
(Pause. Rummages.) There is that incident of the lottery… possibly. Remember?
A
No.
B
(Reading.) 'Two hundred lots… winner receives high class watch… solid gold, hallmark nineteen carats, marvel of accuracy, showing year, month, date, day, hour, minute and second, super chic, unbreakable hair spring, chrono escapement nineteen rubies, anti-shock, anti-magnetic, airtight, waterproof, stainless, self-winding, centre seconds hand, Swiss parts, de luxe lizard band.'
A
What did I tell you? However unhopefully.The mere fact of chancing his luck. I knew he had a spark left in him.
B
The trouble is he didn't procure it himself. It was a gift. That you forget.
A
(Irritated.) I forget, I forget! And he, does he not—(Pause.) At least he kept it.
B
If you can call it that.
A
At least he accepted it. (Pause.) At least he didn't refuse it.
B
I quote: 'The last time I laid eyes on him I was on my way to the Post Office to cash an order for back-pay. The area before the building is shut off by a row of bollards with chains hung between them. He was seated on one of these with his back to the Thompson works. To all appearances down and out. He sat doubled in two, his hands on his knees, his legs astraddle, his head sunk. For a moment I wondered if he was not vomiting. But on drawing nearer I could see he was merely scrutinising, between his feet, a lump of dogshit. I moved it slightly with the tip of my umbrella and observed how his gaze followed the 30movement and fastened on the object in its new position. This at three o'clock in the afternoon if you please! I confess I had not the heart to bid him the time of day, I was overcome. I simply slipped into his hip pocket a lottery ticket I had no use for, while silently wishing him the best of luck. When two hours later I emerged from the Post Office, having cashed my order, he was at the same place and in the same attitude. I sometimes wonder if he is still alive.' Testimony of Mr Feckman, certified accountant and friend for better and for worse.
Pause.
A
Dated when?
B
Recent.
A
It has such a bygone ring. (Pause.) Nothing else?
B
Oh… bits and scraps… good graces of an heirless aunt… unfinished—
A
Hairless aunt?
B
…heirless aunt… unfinished game of chess with a correspondent in Tasmania… hope not dead of living to see the extermination of the species… literary aspirations incompletely stifled… bottom of a dairy-woman in Waterloo Lane… you see the kind of thing.
Pause.
A
We pack up this evening, right?
B
Without fail. Tomorrow we're at Bury St Edmunds.
A
(Sadly.) We'll leave him none the wiser. We'll leave him now, never to meet again, having added nothing to what he knew already.
B
All these testimonies were new to him. They will have finished him off.
A
Not necessarily. (Pause.) Any light on that? (Papers.) This is vital. (Papers.) Something… I seem to remember… something… he said himself.
B
(Papers.) Under 'Confidences' then. (Brief laugh.) Slim file. (Papers.) Confidences… confidences… ah!
A
(Impatient.) Well?
31
B
(Reading.) '… sick headaches… eye trouble… irrational fear of vipers… ear trouble…' —nothing for us there—'… fibroid tumours… pathological horror of songbirds… throat trouble… need of affection…' —we're coming to it—'… inner void… congenital timidity… nose trouble…' —ah! listen to this!—'… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others…' (Looks up.) What did I tell you?
A
(Glum.) Tsstss!
B
I'll read the whole passage: '… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others—' (His lamp goes out.) Well! The bulb has blown! (The lamp goes on again.) No, it hasn't! Must be a faulty connection. (Examines lamp, straightens flex.) The flex was twisted, now all is well. (Reading.) '… morbidly sensitive—' (The lamp goes out.) Bugger and shit!
A
Try giving her a shake. (B shakes the lamp. It goes on again.) See! I picked up that wrinkle in the Band of Hope. (Pause.)
B
(Together.) '… morbidly sensitive—'
A
Keep your hands off the table.
B
What?
A
Keep your hands off the table. If it's a connection the least jog can do it.
B
(Having pulled back his chair a little way.) '… morbidly sensitive—'
The lamp goes out. B bangs on the table with his fist. The lamp goes on again. Pause.
A
Mysterious affair, electricity.
B
(Hurriedly.) '… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others at the time, I mean as often and for as long as they entered my awareness—' What kind of Chinese is that?
A
(Nervously.) Keep going, keep going!
B
'… for as long as they entered my awareness, and that in either case, I mean whether such on the one hand as to give me pleasure or on the contrary on the other to cause me pain, and truth to tell—' Shit! Where's the verb?
32
A
What verb?
B
The main!
A
I give up.
B
Hold on till I find the verb and to hell with all this drivel in the middle. (Reading.) '… were I but… could I but…' —Jesus!—'… though it be… be it but…' —Christ!— ah! I have it—'… I was unfortunately incapable…' Done it!
A
How does it run now?
B
(Solemnly.) '… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others at the time…' —drivel drivel drivel—'… I was unfortunately incapable—'
The lamp goes out. Long pause.
A
Would you care to change seats? (Pause.) You see what I mean? (Pause.) That you come over here with your papers and I go over there. (Pause.) Don't whinge, Morvan, that will get us nowhere.
B
It's my nerves. (Pause.) Ah if I were only twenty years younger I'd put an end to my sufferings!
A
Fie! Never say such horrid things! Even to a well-wisher!
B
May I come to you? (Pause.) I need animal warmth.
Pause.
A
(Coldly.) As you like. (B gets up and goes towards A.) With your files if you don't mind. (B goes back for papers and briefcase, returns towards A, puts them on A's table, remains standing. Pause.) Do you want me to take you on my knees?
Pause. B goes back for his chair, returns towards A, stops before A's table with the chair in his arms. Pause.
B
(Shyly.) May I sit beside you? (They look at each other.) No? (Pause.) Then opposite. (He sits down opposite A, looks at him. Pause.) Do we continue?
A
(Forcibly.) Let's get it over and go to bed.
B rummages in his papers.
B
I'll take the lamp. (He draws it towards him.) Please God it holds out. What would we do in the dark the pair of us? 33(Pause.) Have you matches?
A
Never without. (Pause.) What we would do? Go and stand by the window in the starlight. (B's lamp goes on again.) That is to say you would.
B
(Fervently.) Oh no not alone I wouldn't!
A
Pass me a sheet. (B passes him a sheet.) Switch off. (B switches off.) Oh lord, yours is on again.
B
This gag has gone on long enough for me.
A
Just so. Go and switch it off.
B goes to his table, switches off his lamp. Pause.
B
What am I to do now? Switch it on again?
A
Come back.
B
Switch on then till I see where I'm going.
A switches on. B goes back and sits down opposite A. A switches off, goes to window with sheet, halts, contemplates the sky.
A
And to think all that is nuclear combustion! All that faerie! (He stoops over sheet and reads haltingly.) 'Aged ten, runs away from home first time, brought back next day, admonished, forgiven.' (Pause.) 'Aged fifteen, runs away from home second time, dragged back a week later, thrashed, forgiven.' (Pause.) 'Aged seventeen, runs away from home third time, slinks back six months later with his tail between his legs, locked up, forgiven.' (Pause.) 'Aged seventeen runs away from home last time, crawls back a year later on his hands and knees, kicked out, forgiven.'
Pause. He moves up against window to inspect C's face, to do which he has to lean out a little way, with his back to the void.
B
Careful!
Long pause, all three dead still.
A
(Sadly.) Tsstss! (He resumes his equilibrium.) Switch on. (B switches on. A goes back to his table, sits, returns the sheet to B.) It's heavy going, but we're nearly home.
B
How does he look?
34
A
Not at his best.
B
Has he still got that little smile on his face?
A
Probably.
B
What do you mean, probably, haven't you just been looking at him?
A
He didn't have it then.
B
(With satisfaction.) Ah! (Pause.) Could never make out what he thought he was doing with that smile on his face. And his eyes? Still goggling?
A
Shut.
B
Shut!
A
Oh it was only so as not to see me. He must have opened them again since. (Pause. Violently.) You'd need to stare them in the face day and night! Never take your eyes off them for a week on end! Unbeknownst to them! (Pause.)
B
Looks to me we have him.
A
(Impatiently.) Come on, we're getting nowhere, get on with it.
B rummages in his papers, finds the sheet.
B
(Reading at top speed.) '… morbidly sensitive to the opinion of others at the time…' —drivel drivel drivel—'… I was unfortunately incapable of retaining it for more than ten or fifteen minutes at the most, that is to say the time required to take it in. From then on it might as well never have been uttered.' (Pause.) Tsstss!
A
(With satisfaction.) You see. (Pause.) Where does that come in?
B
In a letter presumably never posted to an anonymous admiratrix.
A
An admiratrix? He had admiratrixes?
B
It begins: 'Dear friend and admiratrix…' That's all we know.
A
Come, Morvan, calm yourself, letters to admiratrixes, we all know what they're worth. No need to take everything literally.
35
B
(Violently, slapping down his hand on the pile of papers.) There's the record, closed and final. That's what we're going on. Too late now to start saying that (slapping to his left) is right and that (slapping to his right) wrong. You're a pain in the arse.
Pause.
A
Good. Let us sum up.
B
We do nothing else.
A
A black future, an unpardonable past—so far as he can remember, inducements to linger on all equally preposterous and the best advice dead letter. Agreed?
B
An heirless aunt preposterous?
A
(Warmly.) He's not the interested type. (Sternly.) One has to consider the client's temperament. To accumulate documents is not enough.
B
(Vexed, slapping on his papers.) Here, as far as I'm concerned the client is here and nowhere else.
A
All right. Is there a single reference there to personal gain? That old aunt, was he ever as much as commonly civil to her? And that dairy-woman, come to that, in all the years he's been going to her for his bit of cheddar, was he ever once wanting in respect? (Pause.) No, Morvan, look you— (Feeble miaow. Pause. Second miaow, louder.)
B
That must be the cat.
A
Sounds like it. (Long pause.) So, agreed? Black future, unpardonable —
B
As you wish. (He starts to tidy back the papers in the briefcase. Wearily.) Let him jump.
A
No further exhibit?
B
Let him jump, let him jump. (He finishes tidying, gets up with the briefcase in his hand.) Let's go.
A consults his watch.
A
It is now… ten… twenty-five.We have no train before eleven twenty. Let us kill the time here, talking of this and that.
B
What do you mean, eleven twenty? Ten fifty.
36
A takes a time-table from his pocket, opens it at relevant page and hands it to B.
A
Where it's marked with a cross. (B consults the time-table, hands it back to A and sits down again. Long pause. A clears his throat. Pause. Impassionately.) How many unfortunates would be so still today if they had known in time to what extent they were so? (Pause.) Remember Smith?
B
Smith? (Pause.) Never knew anyone of that name.
A
Yes you did! A big fat redhair. Always to be seen hanging round World's End. Hadn't done a hand's turn for years. Reputed to have lost his genitals in a shooting accident. His own double-barrel that went off between his legs in a moment of abstraction, just as he was getting set to let fly at a quail.
B
Stranger to me.
A
Well to make a long story short he had his head in the oven when they came to tell him his wife had gone under an ambulance. Hell, says he, I can't miss that, and now he has a steady job in Marks and Spencer's. (Pause.) How is Mildred?
B
(Disgustedly.) Oh you know—(Brief burst of birdsong. Pause.) Good God!
A
Philomel!
B
Oh that put the heart across me!
A
Hsst! (Low.) Hark hark! (Pause. Second brief burst, louder. Pause.) It's in the room! (He gets up, moves away on tiptoe.) Come on, let's have a look.
B
I'm scared!
He gets up none the less and follows cautiously in the wake of A. A advances on tiptoe upstage right, B tiptoes after.
A
(Turning.) Hsst! (They advance, halt in the corner. A strikes a match, holds it above his head. Pause. Low.) She's not here. (He drops the match and crosses the stage on tiptoe followed on tiptoe by B. They pass before the window, halt in the corner upstage left. Match as before. Pause.) Here she is!
B
(Recoiling.) Where?
37
A squats. Pause.
A
Lend me a hand.
B
Let her be! (A straightens up painfully, clutching to his belly a large birdcage covered with a green silk cloth fringed with beads. He starts to stagger with it towards the table.) Give it here.
B helps to carry the cage. Holding it between them they advance warily towards A's table.
A
(Breathing hard.) Hold on a second. (They halt. Pause.) Let's go. (They move on, set down cage gently on the table. A lifts cautiously the cloth on the side away from the audience, peers. Pause.) Show a light.
B takes up the lamp and shines it inside the cage. They peer, stooped. Long pause.
B
There's one dead.
They peer.
A
Have you a pencil? (B hands him a long pencil. A pokes it between the bars of the cage. Pause.) Yes. (He withdraws the pencil, puts it in his pocket.)
B
Hi!
A gives him back his pencil. They peer. A takes B's hand and changes its position.
A
There.
They peer.
B
Is it the cock or the hen?
A
The hen. See how drab she is.
B
(Revolted.) And he goes on singing! (Pause].) There's lovebirds for you!
A
Lovebirds! (Guffaw.) Ah Morvan, you'd be the death of me if I were sufficiently alive! Lovebirds! (Guffaw.) Finches, pinhead! Look at that lovely little green rump! And the blue cap! And the white bars! And the gold breast! (Didactic.) Note moreover the characteristic warble, there can be no mistaking it. (Pause.) Oh you pretty little pet, oh you bonny wee birdie! (Pause. Glum.) And to think all that is organic waste! All that splendour!
38
They peer.
B
They have no seed. (Pause.) No water. (Pointing.) What's that there?
A
That? (Pause. Slow, toneless.) An old cuttle-bone.
B
Cuttle-bone?
A
Cuttle-bone.
He lets the cloth fall back. Pause.
B
Come, Bertrand, don't, there is nothing we can do. (A takes up the cage and goes with it upstage left. B puts down the lamp and hastens after him.) Give it here.
A
Leave it, leave it! (He advances to the corner, followed by B, and puts down the cage where he found it. He straightens up and moves back towards his table, still followed by B. A stops short.) Will you have done dogging me! Do you want me to jump too? (Pause. B goes to A's table, takes up briefcase and chair, goes to his table and sits with back to window. He switches on his lamp, switches it off again immediately.) How end? (Long pause. A goes to window; strikes a match, holds it high and inspects C's face. The match burns out, he throws it out of window.) Hi! Take a look at this! (B does not move. A strikes another match, holds it high and inspects C's face.) Come on! Quick! (B does not move. The match burns out, A lets it fall.) Well I'll be… !
A takes out his handkerchief and raises it timidly towards C's face.
CURTAIN
Curtain. Stage in darkness. Fade up to Listener's Face about 10 feet above stage level midstage off centre.
Old white face, long flaring white hair as if seen from above outspread. Voices a b c are his own coming to him from both sides and above. They modulate back and forth without any break in general flow except where silence indicated. See note.
Silence 7 seconds. Listener's Eyes are open. His breath audible, slow and regular.
A
that time you went back that last time to look was the ruin still there where you hid as a child when was that (Eyes close.) grey day took the eleven to the end of the line and on from there no no trams then all gone long ago that time you went back to look was the ruin still there where you hid as a child that last time not a tram left in the place only the old rails when was that
C
when you went in out of the rain always winter then always raining that time in the Portrait Gallery in off the street out of the cold and rain slipped in when no one was looking and through the rooms shivering and dripping till you found a seat marble slab and sat down to rest and dry off and on to hell out of there when was that
B
on the stone together in the sun on the stone at the edge of the little wood and as far as eye could see the wheat turning yellow vowing every now and then you loved each other just a murmur not touching or anything of that nature you one end of the stone she the other long low stone like millstone no looks just there on the stone in the sun with the little wood behind gazing at the wheat or eyes closed all still no sign of life not a soul abroad no sound
100
A
straight off the ferry and up with the nightbag to the high street neither right nor left not a curse for the old scenes the old names straight up the rise from the wharf to the high street and there not a wire to be seen only the old rails all rust when was that was your mother ah for God's sake all gone long ago that time you went back that last time to look was the ruin still there where you hid as a child someone's folly
C
was your mother ah for God's sake all gone long ago all dust the lot you the last huddled up on the slab in the old green greatcoat with your arms round you whose else hugging you for a bit of warmth to dry off and on to hell out of there and on to the next not a living soul in the place only yourself and the odd attendant drowsing around in his felt shufflers not a sound to be heard only every now and then a shuffle of felt drawing near then dying away
B
all still just the leaves and ears and you too still on the stone in a daze no sound not a word only every now and then to vow you loved each other just a murmur one thing could ever bring tears till they dried up altogether that thought when it came up among the others floated up that scene
A
Foley was it Foley's Folly bit of a tower still standing all the rest rubble and nettles where did you sleep no friend all the homes gone was it that kip on the front where you no she was with you then still with you then just the one night in any case off the ferry one morning and back on her the next to look was the ruin still there where none ever came where you hid as a child slip off when no one was looking and hide there all day long on a stone among the nettles with your picture-book
C
till you hoisted your head and there before your eyes when they opened a vast oil black with age and dirt someone famous in his time some famous man or woman or even child such as a young prince or princess some young prince or princess of the blood black with age behind the glass where gradually as you peered trying to make it out 101gradually of all things a face appeared had you swivel on the slab to see who it was was there at your elbow
B
on the stone in the sun gazing at the wheat or the sky or the eyes closed nothing to be seen but the wheat turning yellow and the blue sky vowing every now and then you loved each other just a murmur tears without fail till they dried up altogether suddenly there in whatever thoughts you might be having whatever scenes perhaps way back in childhood or the womb worst of all or that old Chinaman long before Christ born with long white hair
C
never the same after that never quite the same but that was nothing new if it wasn't this it was that common occurrence something you could never be the same after crawling about year after year sunk in your lifelong mess muttering to yourself who else you'll never be the same after this you were never the same after that
A
or talking to yourself who else out loud imaginary conversations there was childhood for you ten or eleven on a stone among the giant nettles making it up now one voice now another till you were hoarse and they all sounded the same well on into the night some moods in the black dark or moonlight and they all out on the roads looking for you
B
or by the window in the dark harking to the owl not a thought in your head till hard to believe harder and harder to believe you ever told anyone you loved them or anyone you till just one of those things you kept making up to keep the void out just another of those old tales to keep the void from pouring in on top of you the shroud (Silence 10 seconds. Breath audible. After 3 seconds eyes open.)
C
never the same but the same as what for God's sake did you ever say I to yourself in your life come on now (Eyes close.) could you ever say I to yourself in your life turning-point that was a great word with you before they dried up altogether always having turning-points and never but the one the first and last that time curled up worm in slime when they lugged you out and wiped you off and 102straightened you up never another after that never looked back after that was that the time or was that another time
B
muttering that time together on the stone in the sun or that time together on the towpath or that time together in the sand that time that time making it up from there as best you could always together somewhere in the sun on the towpath facing downstream into the sun sinking and the bits of flotsam coming from behind and drifting on or caught in the reeds the dead rat it looked like came on you from behind and went drifting on till you could see it no more
A
that time you went back to look was the ruin still there where you hid as a child that last time straight off the ferry and up the rise to the high street to catch the eleven neither right nor left only one thought in your head not a curse for the old scenes the old names just head down press on up the rise to the top and there stood waiting with the nightbag till the truth began to dawn
C
when you started not knowing who you were from Adam trying how that would work for a change not knowing who you were from Adam no notion who it was saying what you were saying whose skull you were clapped up in whose moan had you the way you were was that the time or was that another time there alone with the portraits of the dead black with dirt and antiquity and the dates on the frames in case you might get the century wrong not believing it could be you till they put you out in the rain at closing-time
B
no sight of the face or any other part never turned to her nor she to you always parallel like on an axle-tree never turned to each other just blurs on the fringes of the field no touching or anything of that nature always space between if only an inch no pawing in the manner of flesh and blood no better than shades no worse if it wasn't for the vows
A
no getting out to it that way so what next no question of asking not another word to the living as long as you lived so foot it up in the end to the station bowed half double get out to it that way all closed down and boarded up Doric 103terminus of the Great Southern and Eastern all closed down and the colonnade crumbling away so what next
C
the rain and the old rounds trying making it up that way as you went along how it would work that way for a change never having been how never having been would work the old rounds trying to wangle you into it tottering and muttering all over the parish till the words dried up and the head dried up and the legs dried up whosever they were or it gave up whoever it was
B
stock still always stock still like that time on the stone or that time in the sand stretched out parallel in the sand in the sun gazing up at the blue or eyes closed blue dark blue dark stock still side by side scene float up and there you were wherever it was
A
gave it up gave up and sat down on the steps in the pale morning sun no those steps got no sun somewhere else then gave up and off somewhere else and down on a step in the pale sun a doorstep say someone's doorstep for it to be time to get on the night ferry and out to hell out of there no need sleep anywhere not a curse for the old scenes the old names the passers pausing to gape at you quick gape then pass pass on pass by on the other side
B
stock still side by side in the sun then sink and vanish without your having stirred any more than the two knobs on a dumbbell except the lids and every now and then the lips to vow and all around too all still all sides wherever it might be no stir or sound only faintly the leaves in the little wood behind or the ears or the bent or the reeds as the case might be of man no sight of man or beast no sight or sound
C
always winter then always raining always slipping in somewhere when no one would be looking in off the street out of the cold and rain in the old green holeproof coat your father left you places you hadn't to pay to get in like the Public Library that was another great thing free culture far from home or the Post Office that was another another place another time
104
A
huddled on the doorstep in the old green greatcoat in the pale sun with the nightbag needless on your knees not knowing where you were little by little not knowing where you were or when you were or what for place might have been uninhabited for all you knew like that time on the stone the child on the stone where none ever came (Silence 10 seconds. Breath audible. After 3 seconds eyes open.)
B
or alone in the same the same scenes making it up that way to keep it going keep it out on the stone (Eyes close.) alone on the end of the stone with the wheat and blue or the towpath alone on the towpath with the ghosts of the mules the drowned rat or bird or whatever it was floating off into the sunset till you could see it no more nothing stirring only the water and the sun going down till it went down and you vanished all vanished
A
none ever came but the child on the stone among the giant nettles with the light coming in where the wall had crumbled away poring on his book well on into the night some moods the moonlight and they all out on the roads looking for him or making up talk breaking up two or more talking to himself being together that way where none ever came
C
always winter then endless winter year after year as if it couldn't end the old year never end like time could go no further that time in the Post Office all bustle Christmas bustle in off the street when no one was looking out of the cold and rain pushed open the door like anyone else and straight for the table neither right nor left with all the forms and the pens on their chains sat down first vacant seat and were taking a look round for a change before drowsing away
B
or that time alone on your back in the sand and no vows to break the peace when was that an earlier time a later time before she came after she went or both before she came after she was gone and you back in the old scene wherever it might be might have been the same old scene before as 105then then as after with the rat or the wheat the yellowing ears or that time in the sand the glider passing over that time you went back soon after long after
A
eleven or twelve in the ruin on the flat stone among the nettles in the dark or moonlight muttering away now one voice now another there was childhood for you till there on the step in the pale sun you heard yourself at it again not a curse for the passers pausing to gape at the scandal huddled there in the sun where it had no warrant clutching the nightbag drooling away out loud eyes closed and the white hair pouring out down from under the hat and so sat on in that pale sun forgetting it all
C
perhaps fear of ejection having clearly no warrant in the place to say nothing of the loathsome appearance so this look round for once at your fellow bastards thanking God for once bad and all as you were you were not as they till it dawned that for all the loathing you were getting you might as well not have been there at all the eyes passing over you and through you like so much thin air was that the time or was that another time another place another time
B
the glider passing over never any change same blue skies nothing ever changed but she with you there or not on your right hand always the right hand on the fringe of the field and every now and then in the great peace like a whisper so faint she loved you hard to believe you even you made up that bit till the time came in the end
A
making it all up on the doorstep as you went along making yourself all up again for the millionth time forgetting it all where you were and what for Foley's Folly and the lot the child's ruin you came to look was it still there to hide in again till it was night and time to go till that time came
C
the Library that was another another place another time that time you slipped in off the street out of the cold and rain when no one was looking what was it then you were never the same after never again after something to do 106with dust something the dust said sitting at the big round table with a bevy of old ones poring on the page and not a sound
B
that time in the end when you tried and couldn't by the window in the dark and the owl flown to hoot at someone else or back with a shrew to its hollow tree and not another sound hour after hour hour after hour not a sound when you tried and tried and couldn't any more no words left to keep it out so gave it up gave up there by the window in the dark or moonlight gave up for good and let it in and nothing the worse a great shroud billowing in all over you on top of you and little or nothing the worse little or nothing
A
back down to the wharf with the nightbag and the old green greatcoat your father left you trailing the ground and the white hair pouring out down from under the hat till that time came on down neither right nor left not a curse for the old scenes the old names not a thought in your head only get back on board and away to hell out of it and never come back or was that another time all that another time was there ever any other time but that time away to hell out of it all and never come back
C
not a sound only the old breath and the leaves turning and then suddenly this dust whole place suddenly full of dust when you opened your eyes from floor to ceiling nothing only dust and not a sound only what was it it said come and gone was that it something like that come and gone come and gone no one come and gone in no time gone in no time
Silence 10 seconds. Breath audible. After 3 seconds eyes open. After 5 seconds smile, toothless for preference. Hold 5 seconds till fade out and curtain.
Voice of Bam (V)
We are the last five.
In the present as were we still.
It is spring.
Time passes.
First without words.
I switch on.
Light on P.
Bam at 3 head haught, Bom at 1 head bowed.
Pause.

Not good.
I switch off.
154
Light off P.

I start again.
We are the last five.
It is spring.
Time passes.
First without words.
I switch on.
Light on P.
Bam alone at 3 head haught.
Pause.

Good.
I am alone.
It is spring.
Time passes.
First without words.
In the end Bom appears.
Reappears.
Bom enters at N, halts at 1 head bowed.
Pause.
Bim enters at E, halts at 2 head haught.
Pause.
Bim exits at E followed by Bom.
Pause.
Bim enters at E, halts at 2 head bowed.
Pause.
Bem enters at N, halts at 1 head haught.
Pause.
Bem exits at N followed by Bim.
Pause.
Bem enters at N, halts at 1 head bowed.
Pause.
Bam exits at W followed by Bem.
Pause.
Bam enters at W, halts at 3 head bowed.
Pause.

Good.
155
I switch off.
Light off P.

I start again.
We are the last five.
It is spring.
Time passes.
I switch on.
Light on P.
Bam alone at 3 head haught.
Pause.

Good.
I am alone.
It is spring.
Time passes.
Now with words.
In the end Bom appears.
Reappears.
Bom enters at N, halts at 1 head bowed.
Bam
Well?
Bom
(Head bowed throughout.) Nothing.
Bam
He didn't say anything?
Bom
No.
Bam
You gave him the works?
Bom
Yes.
Bam
And he didn't say anything?
Bom
No.
Bam
He wept?
Bom
Yes.
Bam
Screamed?
Bom
Yes.
Bam
Begged for mercy?
Bom
Yes.
Bam
But didn't say anything?
Bom
No.
Voice of Bam (V)

Not good.
I start again.
156
Bam
Well?
Bom
Nothing.
Bam
He didn't say it?
Voice of Bam (V)
Good.
Bom
No.
Bam
You gave him the works?
Bom
Yes.
Bam
And he didn't say it?
Bom
No.
Bam
He wept?
Bom
Yes.
Bam
Screamed?
Bom
Yes.
Bam
Begged for mercy?
Bom
Yes.
Bam
But didn't say it?
Bom
No.
Bam
Then why stop?
Bom
He passed out.
Bam
And you didn't revive him?
Bom
I tried.
Bam
Well?
Bom
I couldn't.
Pause.
Bam
It's a lie. (Pause.) He said it to you. (Pause.) Confess he said it to you. (Pause.) You'll be given the works until you confess.
Voice of Bam (V)

Good.
In the end Bim appears.
Bim enters at E, halts at 2 head haught.
Bam
(To Bim.) Are you free?
Bim
Yes.
Bam
Take him away and give him the works until he confesses.
Bim
What must he confess?
Bam
That he said it to him.
157
Bim
Is that all?
Bam
Yes.
Voice of Bam (V)

Not good.
I start again.
Bam
Take him away and give him the works until he confesses.
Bim
What must he confess?
Bam
That he said it to him.
Bim
Is that all?
Bam
And what.
Voice of Bam (V)
Good.
Bim
Is that all?
Bam
Yes.
Bim
Then stop?
Bam
Yes.
Bim
Good. (To Bom.) Come.
Bim exits at E followed by Bom.
Voice of Bam (V)

Good.
I am alone.
It is summer.
Time passes.
In the end Bim appears.
Reappears.
Bim enters at E, halts at 2 head bowed.
Bam
Well?
Bim
(Head bowed throughout.) Nothing.
Bam
He didn't say it?
Bim
No.
Bam
You gave him the works?
Bim
Yes.
Bam
And he didn't say it?
Bim
No.
Voice of Bam (V)

Not good.
I start again.
Bam
Well?
Bim
Nothing.
158
Bam
He didn't say where?
Voice of Bam (V)
Good.
Bim
Where?
Voice of Bam (V)
Ah!
Bam
Where.
Bim
No.
Bam
You gave him the works?
Bim
Yes.
Bam
And he didn't say where?
Bim
No.
Bam
He wept?
Bim
Yes.
Bam
Screamed?
Bim
Yes.
Bam
Begged for mercy?
Bim
Yes.
Bam
But didn't say where?
Bim
No.
Bam
Then why stop?
Bim
He passed out.
Bam
And you didn't revive him?
Bim
I tried.
Bam
Well?
Bim
I couldn't.
Pause.
Bam
It's a lie. (Pause.) He said where to you. (Pause.) Confess he said where to you. (Pause.) You'll be given the works until you confess.
Voice of Bam (V)

Good.
In the end Bem appears.
Bem enters at N, halts at 1 head haught.
Bam
(To Bem.) Are you free?
Bem
Yes.
Bam
Take him away and give him the works until he confesses.
Bem
What must be confess?
159
Bam
That he said where to him.
Bem
Is that all?
Bam
Yes.
Voice of Bam (V)

Not good.
I start again.
Bam
Take him away and give him the works until he confesses.
Bem
What must he confess?
Bam
That he said where to him.
Bem
Is that all?
Bam
And where.
Voice of Bam (V)
Good.
Bem
Is that all?
Bam
Yes.
Bem
Then stop?
Bam
Yes.
Bem
Good. (To Bim.) Come.
Bem exits at N followed by Bim.
Voice of Bam (V)

Good.
I am alone.
It is autumn.
Time passes.
In the end Bem appears.
Reappears.
Bem enters at N, halts at 1 head bowed.
Bam
Well?
Bem
(Head bowed throughout.) Nothing.
Bam
He didn't say where?
Bem
No.
Voice of Bam (V)
So on.
Bam
It's a lie. (Pause.) He said where to you. (Pause.) Confess he said where to you. (Pause.) You'll be given the works until you confess.
Bem
What must I confess?
Bam
That he said where to you.
Bem
Is that all?
Bam
And where.
160
Bem
Is that all?
Bam
Yes.
Bem
Then stop?
Bam
Yes. Come.
Bam exits at W followed by Bem.
Voice of Bam (V)

Good.
It is winter.
Time passes.
In the end I appear.
Reappear.
Bam enters at W, halts at 3 head bowed.
Voice of Bam (V)

Good.
I am alone.
In the present as were I still.
It is winter.
Without journey.
Time passes.
That is all.
Make sense who may.
I switch off.
Light off P.
Pause.
Light off V.

Curtain. Stage in darkness. Fade up to Listener's Face about 10 feet above stage level midstage off centre.
Old white face, long flaring white hair as if seen from above outspread. Voices a b c are his own coming to him from both sides and above. They modulate back and forth without any break in general flow except where silence indicated. See note.
Silence 7 seconds. Listener's Eyes are open. His breath audible, slow and regular.
A
that time you went back that last time to look was the ruin still there where you hid as a child when was that (Eyes close.) grey day took the eleven to the end of the line and on from there no no trams then all gone long ago that time you went back to look was the ruin still there where you hid as a child that last time not a tram left in the place only the old rails when was that
C
when you went in out of the rain always winter then always raining that time in the Portrait Gallery in off the street out of the cold and rain slipped in when no one was looking and through the rooms shivering and dripping till you found a seat marble slab and sat down to rest and dry off and on to hell out of there when was that
B
on the stone together in the sun on the stone at the edge of the little wood and as far as eye could see the wheat turning yellow vowing every now and then you loved each other just a murmur not touching or anything of that nature you one end of the stone she the other long low stone like millstone no looks just there on the stone in the sun with the little wood behind gazing at the wheat or eyes closed all still no sign of life not a soul abroad no sound
100
A
straight off the ferry and up with the nightbag to the high street neither right nor left not a curse for the old scenes the old names straight up the rise from the wharf to the high street and there not a wire to be seen only the old rails all rust when was that was your mother ah for God's sake all gone long ago that time you went back that last time to look was the ruin still there where you hid as a child someone's folly
C
was your mother ah for God's sake all gone long ago all dust the lot you the last huddled up on the slab in the old green greatcoat with your arms round you whose else hugging you for a bit of warmth to dry off and on to hell out of there and on to the next not a living soul in the place only yourself and the odd attendant drowsing around in his felt shufflers not a sound to be heard only every now and then a shuffle of felt drawing near then dying away
B
all still just the leaves and ears and you too still on the stone in a daze no sound not a word only every now and then to vow you loved each other just a murmur one thing could ever bring tears till they dried up altogether that thought when it came up among the others floated up that scene
A
Foley was it Foley's Folly bit of a tower still standing all the rest rubble and nettles where did you sleep no friend all the homes gone was it that kip on the front where you no she was with you then still with you then just the one night in any case off the ferry one morning and back on her the next to look was the ruin still there where none ever came where you hid as a child slip off when no one was looking and hide there all day long on a stone among the nettles with your picture-book
C
till you hoisted your head and there before your eyes when they opened a vast oil black with age and dirt someone famous in his time some famous man or woman or even child such as a young prince or princess some young prince or princess of the blood black with age behind the glass where gradually as you peered trying to make it out 101gradually of all things a face appeared had you swivel on the slab to see who it was was there at your elbow
B
on the stone in the sun gazing at the wheat or the sky or the eyes closed nothing to be seen but the wheat turning yellow and the blue sky vowing every now and then you loved each other just a murmur tears without fail till they dried up altogether suddenly there in whatever thoughts you might be having whatever scenes perhaps way back in childhood or the womb worst of all or that old Chinaman long before Christ born with long white hair
C
never the same after that never quite the same but that was nothing new if it wasn't this it was that common occurrence something you could never be the same after crawling about year after year sunk in your lifelong mess muttering to yourself who else you'll never be the same after this you were never the same after that
A
or talking to yourself who else out loud imaginary conversations there was childhood for you ten or eleven on a stone among the giant nettles making it up now one voice now another till you were hoarse and they all sounded the same well on into the night some moods in the black dark or moonlight and they all out on the roads looking for you
B
or by the window in the dark harking to the owl not a thought in your head till hard to believe harder and harder to believe you ever told anyone you loved them or anyone you till just one of those things you kept making up to keep the void out just another of those old tales to keep the void from pouring in on top of you the shroud (Silence 10 seconds. Breath audible. After 3 seconds eyes open.)
C
never the same but the same as what for God's sake did you ever say I to yourself in your life come on now (Eyes close.) could you ever say I to yourself in your life turning-point that was a great word with you before they dried up altogether always having turning-points and never but the one the first and last that time curled up worm in slime when they lugged you out and wiped you off and 102straightened you up never another after that never looked back after that was that the time or was that another time
B
muttering that time together on the stone in the sun or that time together on the towpath or that time together in the sand that time that time making it up from there as best you could always together somewhere in the sun on the towpath facing downstream into the sun sinking and the bits of flotsam coming from behind and drifting on or caught in the reeds the dead rat it looked like came on you from behind and went drifting on till you could see it no more
A
that time you went back to look was the ruin still there where you hid as a child that last time straight off the ferry and up the rise to the high street to catch the eleven neither right nor left only one thought in your head not a curse for the old scenes the old names just head down press on up the rise to the top and there stood waiting with the nightbag till the truth began to dawn
C
when you started not knowing who you were from Adam trying how that would work for a change not knowing who you were from Adam no notion who it was saying what you were saying whose skull you were clapped up in whose moan had you the way you were was that the time or was that another time there alone with the portraits of the dead black with dirt and antiquity and the dates on the frames in case you might get the century wrong not believing it could be you till they put you out in the rain at closing-time
B
no sight of the face or any other part never turned to her nor she to you always parallel like on an axle-tree never turned to each other just blurs on the fringes of the field no touching or anything of that nature always space between if only an inch no pawing in the manner of flesh and blood no better than shades no worse if it wasn't for the vows
A
no getting out to it that way so what next no question of asking not another word to the living as long as you lived so foot it up in the end to the station bowed half double get out to it that way all closed down and boarded up Doric 103terminus of the Great Southern and Eastern all closed down and the colonnade crumbling away so what next
C
the rain and the old rounds trying making it up that way as you went along how it would work that way for a change never having been how never having been would work the old rounds trying to wangle you into it tottering and muttering all over the parish till the words dried up and the head dried up and the legs dried up whosever they were or it gave up whoever it was
B
stock still always stock still like that time on the stone or that time in the sand stretched out parallel in the sand in the sun gazing up at the blue or eyes closed blue dark blue dark stock still side by side scene float up and there you were wherever it was
A
gave it up gave up and sat down on the steps in the pale morning sun no those steps got no sun somewhere else then gave up and off somewhere else and down on a step in the pale sun a doorstep say someone's doorstep for it to be time to get on the night ferry and out to hell out of there no need sleep anywhere not a curse for the old scenes the old names the passers pausing to gape at you quick gape then pass pass on pass by on the other side
B
stock still side by side in the sun then sink and vanish without your having stirred any more than the two knobs on a dumbbell except the lids and every now and then the lips to vow and all around too all still all sides wherever it might be no stir or sound only faintly the leaves in the little wood behind or the ears or the bent or the reeds as the case might be of man no sight of man or beast no sight or sound
C
always winter then always raining always slipping in somewhere when no one would be looking in off the street out of the cold and rain in the old green holeproof coat your father left you places you hadn't to pay to get in like the Public Library that was another great thing free culture far from home or the Post Office that was another another place another time
104
A
huddled on the doorstep in the old green greatcoat in the pale sun with the nightbag needless on your knees not knowing where you were little by little not knowing where you were or when you were or what for place might have been uninhabited for all you knew like that time on the stone the child on the stone where none ever came (Silence 10 seconds. Breath audible. After 3 seconds eyes open.)
B
or alone in the same the same scenes making it up that way to keep it going keep it out on the stone (Eyes close.) alone on the end of the stone with the wheat and blue or the towpath alone on the towpath with the ghosts of the mules the drowned rat or bird or whatever it was floating off into the sunset till you could see it no more nothing stirring only the water and the sun going down till it went down and you vanished all vanished
A
none ever came but the child on the stone among the giant nettles with the light coming in where the wall had crumbled away poring on his book well on into the night some moods the moonlight and they all out on the roads looking for him or making up talk breaking up two or more talking to himself being together that way where none ever came
C
always winter then endless winter year after year as if it couldn't end the old year never end like time could go no further that time in the Post Office all bustle Christmas bustle in off the street when no one was looking out of the cold and rain pushed open the door like anyone else and straight for the table neither right nor left with all the forms and the pens on their chains sat down first vacant seat and were taking a look round for a change before drowsing away
B
or that time alone on your back in the sand and no vows to break the peace when was that an earlier time a later time before she came after she went or both before she came after she was gone and you back in the old scene wherever it might be might have been the same old scene before as 105then then as after with the rat or the wheat the yellowing ears or that time in the sand the glider passing over that time you went back soon after long after
A
eleven or twelve in the ruin on the flat stone among the nettles in the dark or moonlight muttering away now one voice now another there was childhood for you till there on the step in the pale sun you heard yourself at it again not a curse for the passers pausing to gape at the scandal huddled there in the sun where it had no warrant clutching the nightbag drooling away out loud eyes closed and the white hair pouring out down from under the hat and so sat on in that pale sun forgetting it all
C
perhaps fear of ejection having clearly no warrant in the place to say nothing of the loathsome appearance so this look round for once at your fellow bastards thanking God for once bad and all as you were you were not as they till it dawned that for all the loathing you were getting you might as well not have been there at all the eyes passing over you and through you like so much thin air was that the time or was that another time another place another time
B
the glider passing over never any change same blue skies nothing ever changed but she with you there or not on your right hand always the right hand on the fringe of the field and every now and then in the great peace like a whisper so faint she loved you hard to believe you even you made up that bit till the time came in the end
A
making it all up on the doorstep as you went along making yourself all up again for the millionth time forgetting it all where you were and what for Foley's Folly and the lot the child's ruin you came to look was it still there to hide in again till it was night and time to go till that time came
C
the Library that was another another place another time that time you slipped in off the street out of the cold and rain when no one was looking what was it then you were never the same after never again after something to do 106with dust something the dust said sitting at the big round table with a bevy of old ones poring on the page and not a sound
B
that time in the end when you tried and couldn't by the window in the dark and the owl flown to hoot at someone else or back with a shrew to its hollow tree and not another sound hour after hour hour after hour not a sound when you tried and tried and couldn't any more no words left to keep it out so gave it up gave up there by the window in the dark or moonlight gave up for good and let it in and nothing the worse a great shroud billowing in all over you on top of you and little or nothing the worse little or nothing
A
back down to the wharf with the nightbag and the old green greatcoat your father left you trailing the ground and the white hair pouring out down from under the hat till that time came on down neither right nor left not a curse for the old scenes the old names not a thought in your head only get back on board and away to hell out of it and never come back or was that another time all that another time was there ever any other time but that time away to hell out of it all and never come back
C
not a sound only the old breath and the leaves turning and then suddenly this dust whole place suddenly full of dust when you opened your eyes from floor to ceiling nothing only dust and not a sound only what was it it said come and gone was that it something like that come and gone come and gone no one come and gone in no time gone in no time
Silence 10 seconds. Breath audible. After 3 seconds eyes open. After 5 seconds smile, toothless for preference. Hold 5 seconds till fade out and curtain.

Act 1
A country road. A tree. Evening.
Estragon, sitting on a low mound, is trying to take off his boot. He pulls at it with both hands, panting. He gives up, exhausted, rests, tries again. As before.
Enter Vladimir.
Estragon
(Giving up again.) Nothing to be done.
Vladimir
(Advancing with short, stiff strides, legs wide apart.) I'm beginning to come round to that opinion. All my life I've tried to put it from me, saying, Vladimir, be reasonable, you haven't yet tried everything. And I resumed the struggle. (He broods, musing on the struggle. Turning to Estragon.) So there you are again.
Estragon
Ami?
Vladimir
I'm glad to see you back. I thought you were gone for ever.
Estragon
Me too.
Vladimir
Together again at last! We'll have to celebrate this. But how? (He reflects.) Get up till I embrace you.
Estragon
(Irritably.) Not now, not now.
Vladimir
(Hurt, coldly.) May one enquire where His Highness spent the night?
Estragon
In a ditch.
Vladimir
(Admiringly.) A ditch! Where?
Estragon
(Without gesture.) Over there.
Vladimir
And they didn't beat you?
Estragon
Beat me? Certainly they beat me.
Vladimir
The same lot as usual?
Estragon
The same? I don't know.
Vladimir
When I think of it… all these years… but for me… where would you be… ? (Decisively.) 6You'd be nothing more than a little heap of bones at the present minute, no doubt about it.
Estragon
And what of it?
Vladimir
(Gloomily.) It's too much for one man. (Pause. Cheerfully.) On the other hand, what's the good of losing heart now, that's what I say. We should have thought of it a million years ago, in the nineties.
Estragon
Ah, stop blathering and help me off with this bloody thing.
Vladimir
Hand in hand from the top of the Eiffel Tower, among the first. We were presentable in those days. Now it's too late. They wouldn't even let us up. (Estragon tears at his boot.) What are you doing?
Estragon
Taking off my boot. Did that never happen to you?
Vladimir
Boots must be taken off every day, I'm tired telling you that. Why don't you listen to me?
Estragon
(Feebly.) Help me!
Vladimir
It hurts?
Estragon
Hurts! He wants to know if it hurts!
Vladimir
(Angrily.) No one ever suffers but you. I don't count. I'd like to hear what you'd say if you had what I have.
Estragon
It hurts?
Vladimir
Hurts! He wants to know if it hurts!
Estragon
(Pointing.) You might button it all the same.
Vladimir
(Stooping.) True. (He buttons his fly.) Never neglect the little things of life.
Estragon
What do you expect, you always wait till the last moment.
Vladimir
(Musingly.) The last moment… (He meditates.) Hope deferred maketh the something sick, who said that?
Estragon
Why don't you help me?
Vladimir
Sometimes I feel it coming all the same. Then I go all queer. (He takes off his hat, peers inside it, feels 7about inside it, shakes it, puts it on again.) How shall I say? Relieved and at the same time… (He searches for the word.) …appalled. (With emphasis.) AP-PALLED. (He takes off his hat again, peers inside it.) Funny. (He knocks on the crown as though to dislodge a foreign body, peers into it again, puts it on again.) Nothing to be done, (Estragon with a supreme effort succeeds in pulling off his boot. He looks inside it, feels about inside it, turns it upside down, shakes it, looks on the ground to see if anything has fallen out, finds nothing, feels inside it again, staring sightlessly before him.) Well?
Estragon
Nothing.
Vladimir
Show.
Estragon
There's nothing to show.
Vladimir
Try and put it on again.
Estragon
(Examining his foot.) I'll air it for a bit.
Vladimir
There's man all over for you, blaming on his boots the faults of his feet. (He takes off his hat again, peers inside it, feels about inside it, knocks on the crown, blows into it, puts it on again.) This is getting alarming. (Silence. Vladimir deep in thought, Estragon pulling at his toes.) One of the thieves was saved. (Pause.) It's a reasonable percentage. (Pause.) Gogo.
Estragon
What?
Vladimir
Suppose we repented.
Estragon
Repented what?
Vladimir
Oh… (He reflects.) We wouldn't have to go into the details.
Estragon
Our being born?
Vladimir breaks into a hearty laugh which he immediately stifles, his hand pressed to his pubis, his face contorted.
Vladimir
One daren't even laugh any more.
Estragon
Dreadful privation.
Vladimir
Merely smile. (He smiles suddenly from ear to 8ear, keeps smiling, ceases as suddenly.) It's not the same thing. Nothing to be done. (Pause.) Gogo.
Estragon
(Irritably.) What is it?
Vladimir
Did you ever read the Bible?
Estragon
The Bible… (He reflects.) I must have taken a look at it.
Vladimir
Do you remember the Gospels?
Estragon
I remember the maps of the Holy Land. Coloured they were. Very pretty. The Dead Sea was pale blue. The very look of it made me thirsty. That's where we'll go, I used to say, that's where we'll go for our honeymoon. We'll swim. We'll be happy.
Vladimir
You should have been a poet.
Estragon
I was. (Gesture towards his rags.) Isn't that obvious.
Silence.
Vladimir
Where was I… How's your foot?
Estragon
Swelling visibly.
Vladimir
Ah yes, the two thieves. Do you remember the story?
Estragon
No.
Vladimir
Shall I tell it to you?
Estragon
No.
Vladimir
It'll pass the time. (Pause.) Two thieves, crucified at the same time as our Saviour. One –
Estragon
Our what?
Vladimir
Our Saviour. Two thieves. One is supposed to have been saved and the other… (He searches for the contrary of saved) …damned.
Estragon
Saved from what?
Vladimir
Hell.
Estragon
I'm going.
He does not move.
Vladimir
And yet… (Pause.) …how is it – this is not boring you I hope – how is it that of the four Evangelists only one speaks of a thief being saved. 9The four of them were there – or thereabouts – and only one speaks of a thief being saved. (Pause.) Come on, Gogo, return the ball, can't you, once in a way?
Estragon
(With exaggerated enthusiasm.) I find this really most extraordinarily interesting.
Vladimir
One out of four. Of the other three two don't mention any thieves at all and the third says that both of them abused him.
Estragon
Who?
Vladimir
What?
Estragon
What's all this about? Abused who?
Vladimir
The Saviour.
Estragon
Why?
Vladimir
Because he wouldn't save them.
Estragon
From hell?
Vladimir
Imbecile! From death.
Estragon
I thought you said hell.
Vladimir
From death, from death.
Estragon
Well, what of it?
Vladimir
Then the two of them must have been damned.
Estragon
And why not?
Vladimir
But one of the four says that one of the two was saved.
Estragon
Well? They don't agree, and that's all there is to it.
Vladimir
But all four were there. And only one speaks of a thief being saved. Why believe him rather than the others?
Estragon
Who believes him?
Vladimir
Everybody. It's the only version they know.
Estragon
People are bloody ignorant apes.
He rises painfully, goes limping to extreme left, halts, gazes into distance off with his hand screening his eyes, turns, goes to extreme right, gazes into distance. Vladimir watches him, then goes and picks up the boot, peers into it, drops it hastily.
10
Vladimir
Pah!
He spits, Estragon moves to centre, halts with his back to auditorium.
Estragon
Charming spot. (He turns, advances to front, halts facing auditorium.) Inspiring prospects. (He turns to Vladimir.) Let's go.
Vladimir
We can't.
Estragon
Why not?
Vladimir
We're waiting for Godot.
Estragon
(Despairingly.) Ah! (Pause.) You're sure it was here?
Vladimir
What?
Estragon
That we were to wait.
Vladimir
He said by the tree. (They look at the tree.) Do you see any others?
Estragon
What is it?
Vladimir
I don't know. A willow.
Estragon
Where are the leaves?
Vladimir
It must be dead.
Estragon
No more weeping.
Vladimir
Or perhaps it's not the season.
Estragon
Looks to me more like a bush.
Vladimir
A shrub.
Estragon
A bush.
Vladimir
A – . What are you insinuating? That we've come to the wrong place?
Estragon
He should be here.
Vladimir
He didn't say for sure he'd come.
Estragon
And if he doesn't come?
Vladimir
We'll come back tomorrow.
Estragon
And then the day after tomorrow.
Vladimir
Possibly.
Estragon
And so on.
Vladimir
The point is –
Estragon
Until he comes.
Vladimir
You're merciless.
11
Estragon
We came here yesterday.
Vladimir
Ah no, there you're mistaken.
Estragon
What did we do yesterday?
Vladimir
What did we do yesterday?
Estragon
Yes.
Vladimir
Why… (Angrily.) Nothing is certain when you're about.
Estragon
In my opinion we were here.
Vladimir
(Looking around.) You recognize the place?
Estragon
I didn't say that.
Vladimir
Well?
Estragon
That makes no difference.
Vladimir
All the same… that tree… (Turning towards the auditorium) …that bog.
Estragon
You're sure it was this evening?
Vladimir
What?
Estragon
That we were to wait.
Vladimir
He said Saturday. (Pause.) I think.
Estragon
You think.
Vladimir
I must have made a note of it.
He fumbles in his pockets, bursting with miscellaneous rubbish.
Estragon
(Very insidious.) But what Saturday? And is it Saturday? Is it not rather Sunday? (Pause.) Or Monday? (Pause.) Or Friday?
Vladimir
(Looking wildly about him, as though the date was inscribed in the landscape.) It's not possible!
Estragon
Or Thursday?
Vladimir
What'll we do?
Estragon
If he came yesterday and we weren't here you may be sure he won't come again today.
Vladimir
But you say we were here yesterday.
Estragon
I may be mistaken. (Pause.) Let's stop talking for a minute, do you mind?
Vladimir
(Feebly.) All right, (Estragon sits down on the mound. Vladimir paces agitatedly to and fro, 12halting from time to time to gaze into the distance off Estragon falls asleep. Vladimir halts before Estragon.) Gogo!… Gogo!… GOGO! (Estragon wakes with a start.)
Estragon
(Restored to the horror of his situation.) I was asleep! (Despairingly.) Why will you never let me sleep?
Vladimir
I felt lonely.
Estragon
I had a dream.
Vladimir
Don't tell me!
Estragon
I dreamt that –
Vladimir
DON'T TELL ME!
Estragon
(Gesture towards the universe.) This one is enough for you? (Silence.) It's not nice of you, Didi. Who am I to tell my private nightmares to if I can't tell them to you?
Vladimir
Let them remain private. You know I can't bear that.
Estragon
(Coldly.) There are times when I wonder if it wouldn't be better for us to part.
Vladimir
You wouldn't go far.
Estragon
That would be too bad, really too bad. (Pause.) Wouldn't it, Didi, be really too bad? (Pause.) When you think of the beauty of the way. (Pause.) And the goodness of the wayfarers. (Pause. Wheedling.) Wouldn't it, Didi?
Vladimir
Calm yourself.
Estragon
(Voluptuously.) Calm… calm… The English say cawm. (Pause.) You know the story of the Englishman in the brothel?
Vladimir
Yes.
Estragon
Tell it to me.
Vladimir
Ah, stop it!
Estragon
An Englishman having drunk a little more than usual goes to a brothel. The bawd asks him if he wants a fair one, a dark one, or a red-haired one. Go on.
13
Vladimir
STOP IT!
Exit Vladimir hurriedly, Estragon gets up and follows him as far as the limit of the stage. Gestures of Estragon like those of a spectator encouraging a pugilist. Enter Vladimir. He brushes past Estragon, crosses the stage with bowed head, Estragon takes a step towards him, halts.
Estragon
(Gently.) You wanted to speak to me? (Silence, Estragon takes a step forward.) You had something to say to me? (Silence. Another step forward.) Didi…
Vladimir
(Without turning.) I've nothing to say to you.
Estragon
(Step forward.) You're angry? (Silence. Step forward.) Forgive me. (Silence. Step forward. Estragon lays his hand on Vladimir's shoulder.) Come, Didi. (Silence.) Give me your hand. (Vladimir half turns.) Embrace me! (Vladimir stiffens.) Don't be stubborn! (Vladimir softens. They embrace. Estragon recoils.) You stink of garlic!
Vladimir
It's for the kidneys. (Silence, Estragon looks attentively at the tree.) What do we do now?
Estragon
Wait.
Vladimir
Yes, but while waiting.
Estragon
What about hanging ourselves?
Vladimir
Hmm. It'd give us an erection!
Estragon
(Highly excited.) An erection!
Vladimir
With all that follows. Where it falls, mandrakes grow. That's why they shriek when you pull them up. Did you not know that?
Estragon
Let's hang ourselves immediately!
Vladimir
From a bough? (They go towards the tree.) I wouldn't trust it.
Estragon
We can always try.
Vladimir
Go ahead.
Estragon
After you.
Vladimir
No no, you first.
14
Estragon
Why me?
Vladimir
You're lighter than I am.
Estragon
Just so!
Vladimir
I don't understand.
Estragon
Use your intelligence, can't you?
Vladimir uses his intelligence.
Vladimir
(Finally.) I remain in the dark.
Estragon
This is how it is. (He reflects.) The bough… the bough… (Angrily.) Use your head, can't you?
Vladimir
You're my only hope.
Estragon
(With effort.) Gogo light – bough not break – Gogo dead. Didi heavy – bough break – Didi alone. Whereas –
Vladimir
I hadn't thought of that.
Estragon
If it hangs you it'll hang anything.
Vladimir
But am I heavier than you?
Estragon
So you tell me. I don't know. There's an even chance. Or nearly.
Vladimir
Well? What do we do?
Estragon
Don't let's do anything. It's safer.
Vladimir
Let's wait and see what he says.
Estragon
Who?
Vladimir
Godot.
Estragon
Good idea.
Vladimir
Let's wait till we know exactly how we stand.
Estragon
On the other hand, it might be better to strike the iron before it freezes.
Vladimir
I'm curious to hear what he has to offer. Then we'll take it or leave it.
Estragon
What exactly did we ask him for?
Vladimir
Were you not there?
Estragon
I can't have been listening.
Vladimir
Oh… nothing very definite.
Estragon
A kind of prayer.
Vladimir
Precisely.
Estragon
A vague supplication.
15
Vladimir
Exactly.
Estragon
And what did he reply?
Vladimir
That he'd see.
Estragon
That he couldn't promise anything.
Vladimir
That he'd have to think it over.
Estragon
In the quiet of his home.
Vladimir
Consult his family.
Estragon
His friends.
Vladimir
His agents.
Estragon
His correspondents.
Vladimir
His books.
Estragon
His bank account.
Vladimir
Before taking a decision.
Estragon
It's the normal thing.
Vladimir
Is it not?
Estragon
I think it is.
Vladimir
I think so too.
Silence.
Estragon
(Anxious.) And we?
Vladimir
I beg your pardon?
Estragon
I said, And we?
Vladimir
I don't understand.
Estragon
Where do we come in?
Vladimir
Come in?
Estragon
Take your time.
Vladimir
Come in? On our hands and knees.
Estragon
As bad as that?
Vladimir
Your Worship wishes to assert his prerogatives?
Estragon
We've no rights any more?
Laugh of Vladimir, stifled as before, less the smile.
Vladimir
You'd make me laugh, if it wasn't prohibited.
Estragon
We've lost our rights?
Vladimir
(Distinctly.) We got rid of them.
Silence. They remain motionless, arms dangling, heads sunk, sagging at the knees.
16
Estragon
(Feebly.) We're not tied? (Pause.) We're not –
Vladimir
Listen!
They listen, grotesquely rigid.
Estragon
I hear nothing.
Vladimir
Hssst! (They listen, Estragon loses his balance, almost falls. He clutches the arm of Vladimir, who totters. They listen, huddled together.) Nor I. (Sighs of relief. They relax and separate.)
Estragon
You gave me a fright.
Vladimir
I thought it was he.
Estragon
Who?
Vladimir
Godot.
Estragon
Pah! The wind in the reeds.
Vladimir
I could have sworn I heard shouts.
Estragon
And why would he shout?
Vladimir
At his horse.
Silence.
Estragon
(Violently.) I'm hungry.
Vladimir
Do you want a carrot?
Estragon
Is that all there is?
Vladimir
I might have some turnips.
Estragon
Give me a carrot. (Vladimir rummages in his pockets, takes out a turnip and gives it to Estragon who takes a bite out of it. Angrily.) It's a turnip!
Vladimir
Oh pardon! I could have sworn it was a carrot. (He rummages again in his pockets, finds nothing but turnips.) All that's turnips. (He rummages.) You must have eaten the last. (He rummages.) Wait, I have it. (He brings out a carrot and gives it to Estragon.) There, dear fellow, (Estragon wipes the carrot on his sleeve and begins to eat it.) Give me the turnip. (Estragon gives back the turnip which Vladimir puts in his pocket.) Make it last, that's the end of them.
17
Estragon
(Chewing.) I asked you a question.
Vladimir
Ah.
Estragon
Did you reply?
Vladimir
How's the carrot?
Estragon
It's a carrot.
Vladimir
So much the better, so much the better. (Pause.) What was it you wanted to know?
Estragon
I've forgotten. (Chews.) That's what annoys me. (He looks at the carrot appreciatively, dangles it between finger and thumb.) I'll never forget this carrot. (He sucks the end of it meditatively.) Ah yes, now I remember.
Vladimir
Well?
Estragon
(His mouth full, vacuously.) We're not tied!
Vladimir
I don't hear a word you're saying.
Estragon
(Chews, swallows.) I'm asking you if we're tied.
Vladimir
Tied?
Estragon
Ti-ed.
Vladimir
How do you mean, tied?
Estragon
Down.
Vladimir
But to whom. By whom?
Estragon
To your man.
Vladimir
To Godot? Tied to Godot? What an idea! No question of it. (Pause.) For the moment.
Estragon
His name is Godot?
Vladimir
I think so.
Estragon
Fancy that. (He raises what remains of the carrot by the stub of leaf, twirls it before his eyes.) Funny, the more you eat the worse it gets.
Vladimir
With me it's just the opposite.
Estragon
In other words?
Vladimir
I get used to the muck as I go along.
Estragon
(After prolonged reflection.) Is that the opposite?
Vladimir
Question of temperament.
18
Estragon
Of character.
Vladimir
Nothing you can do about it.
Estragon
No use struggling.
Vladimir
One is what one is.
Estragon
No use wriggling.
Vladimir
The essential doesn't change.
Estragon
Nothing to be done. (He proffers the remains of the carrot to Vladimir.) Like to finish it?
A terrible cry, close at hand, Estragon drops the carrot. They remain motionless, then together make a sudden rush towards the wings, Estragon stops half-way, runs back, picks up the carrot, stuffs it in his pocket, runs towards Vladimir who is waiting for him, stops again, runs back, picks up his boot, runs to rejoin Vladimir. Huddled together, shoulders hunched, cringing away from the menace, they wait.
Enter Pozzo and Lucky, Pozzo drives Lucky by means of a rope passed round his neck, so that Lucky is the first to appear, followed by the rope, which is long enough to allow him to reach the middle of the stage before Pozzo appears, Lucky carries a heavy bag, a folding stool, a picnic basket and a greatcoat, Pozzo a whip.
Pozzo
(Off.) On! (Crack of whip, Pozzo appears. They cross the stage, Lucky passes before Vladimir and Estragon and exits, Pozzo at the sight of Vladimir and Estragon stops short. The rope tautens, Pozzo jerks it violently.) Back! (Noise of Lucky falling with all his baggage. Vladimir and Estragon turn towards him, half wishing, half fearing to go to his assistance. Vladimir takes a step towards Lucky, Estragon holds him back by the sleeve.)
Vladimir
Let me go!
Estragon
Stay where you are!
19
Pozzo
Be careful! He's wicked. (Vladimir and Estragon turn towards Pozzo.) With strangers.
Estragon
(Undertone.) Is that him?
Vladimir
Who?
Estragon
(Trying to remember the name.) Er…
Vladimir
Godot?
Estragon
Yes.
Pozzo
I present myself: Pozzo.
Vladimir
(To Estragon.) Not at all!
Estragon
He said Godot.
Vladimir
Not at all!
Estragon
(Timidly to Pozzo.) You're not Mr Godot, sir?
Pozzo
(Terrifying voice.) I am Pozzo! (Silence.) Pozzo! (Silence.) Does that name mean nothing to you? (Silence.) I say does that name mean nothing to you? (Vladimir and Estragon look at each other questioningly.)
Estragon
(Pretending to search.) Bozzo… Bozzo…
Vladimir
(Ditto.) Pozzo… Pozzo…
Pozzo
PPPOZZZO!
Estragon
Ah! Pozzo… let me see… Pozzo…
Vladimir
It is Pozzo or Bozzo?
Estragon
Pozzo… no… I'm afraid I… no… I don't seem to…
Pozzo advances threateningly.
Vladimir
(Conciliating.) I once knew a family called Gozzo. The mother had the clap.
Estragon
(Hastily.) We're not from these parts, sir.
Pozzo
(Halting.) You are human beings none the less. (He puts on his glasses.) As far as one can see. (He takes off his glasses.) Of the same species as myself. (He bursts into an enormous laugh.) Of the same species as Pozzo! Made in God's image!
Vladimir
Well you see –
Pozzo
(Peremptory.) Who is Godot?
Estragon
Godot?
20
Pozzo
You took me for Godot.
Estragon
Oh no, sir, not for an instant, sir.
Pozzo
Who is he?
Vladimir
Oh, he's a… he's a kind of acquaintance.
Estragon
Nothing of the kind, we hardly know him.
Vladimir
True… we don't know him very well… but all the same…
Estragon
Personally I wouldn't even know him if I saw him.
Pozzo
You took me for him.
Estragon
(Recoiling before Pozzo.) That's to say… you understand… the dusk… the strain… waiting… I confess… I imagined… for a second…
Pozzo
Waiting? So you were waiting for him?
Vladimir
Well you see –
Pozzo
Here? On my land?
Vladimir
We didn't intend any harm.
Estragon
We meant well.
Pozzo
The road is free to all.
Vladimir
That's how we looked at it.
Pozzo
It's a disgrace. But there you are.
Estragon
Nothing we can do about it.
Pozzo
(With magnanimous gesture.) Let's say no more about it. (He jerks the rope.) Up pig! (Pause.) Every time he drops he falls asleep. (Jerks the rope.) Up hog! (Noise of Lucky getting up and picking up his baggage, Pozzo jerks the rope.) Back! (Enter Lucky backwards.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Turn! (Lucky turns. To Vladimir and Estragon, affably.) Gentlemen, I am happy to have met you. (Before their incredulous expression.) Yes, yes, sincerely happy. (He jerks the rope.) Closer! (Lucky advances.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Yes, the road seems long when one journeys all alone for… (He consults his watch) …yes… (He calculates) …yes, six hours, that's right, six hours on end, and never a soul in sight. (To Lucky.) 21Coat! (Lucky puts down the bag, advances, gives the coat, goes back to his place, takes up the bag.) Hold that! (Pozzo holds out the whip, Lucky advances and, both his hands being occupied, takes the whip in his mouth, then goes back to his place, Pozzo begins to put on his coat, stops.) Coat! (Lucky puts down bag, basket and stool, advances, helps Pozzo on with his coat, goes back to his place and takes up bag, basket and stool.) Touch of autumn in the air this evening, (Pozzo finishes buttoning his coat, stoops, inspects himself, straightens up.) Whip! (Lucky advances, stoops, Pozzo snatches the whip from his mouth, Lucky goes back to his place.) Yes, gentlemen, I cannot go for long without the society of my likes (He puts on his glasses and looks at the two likes) even when the likeness is an imperfect one. (He takes off his glasses.) Stool! (Lucky puts down bag and basket, advances, opens stool, puts it down, goes back to his place, takes up bag and basket.) Closer! (Lucky puts down bag and basket, advances, moves stool, goes back to his place, takes up bag and basket. Pozzo sits down, places the butt of his whip against Lucky's chest and pushes.) Back! (Lucky takes a step back.) Further! (Lucky takes another step back.) Stop! (Lucky stops. To Vladimir and Estragon.) That is why, with your permission, I propose to dally with you a moment, before I venture any further. Basket! (Lucky advances, gives the basket, goes back to his place.) The fresh air stimulates the jaded appetite. (He opens the basket, takes out a piece of chicken and a bottle of wine.) Basket! (Lucky advances, picks up the basket, goes back to his place.) Further! (Lucky takes a step back.) He stinks. Happy days! (He drinks from the bottle, puts it down and begins to eat. Silence. Vladimir and Estragon, cautiously at first, then more boldly, begin to circle about Lucky, 22inspecting him up and down, Pozzo eats his chicken voraciously, throwing away the bones after having sucked them, Lucky sags slowly, until bag and basket touch the ground, then straightens up with a start and begins to sag again. Rhythm of one sleeping on his feet.)
Estragon
What ails him?
Vladimir
He looks tired.
Estragon
Why doesn't he put down his bags?
Vladimir
How do I know? (They close in on him.) Careful!
Estragon
Say something to him.
Vladimir
Look!
Estragon
What?
Vladimir
(Pointing.) His neck!
Estragon
(Looking at his neck.) I see nothing.
Vladimir
Here.
Estragon goes over beside Vladimir.
Estragon
Oh I say.
Vladimir
A running sore!
Estragon
It's the rope.
Vladimir
It's the rubbing.
Estragon
It's inevitable.
Vladimir
It's the knot.
Estragon
It's the chafing.
They resume their inspection, dwell on the face.
Vladimir
(Grudgingly.) He's not bad looking.
Estragon
(Shrugging his shoulders, wry face.) Would you say so?
Vladimir
A trifle effeminate.
Estragon
Look at the slobber.
Vladimir
It's inevitable.
Estragon
Look at the slaver.
Vladimir
Perhaps he's a half-wit.
Estragon
A cretin.
Vladimir
(Looking closer.) It looks like a goitre.
23
Estragon
(Ditto.) It's not certain.
Vladimir
He's panting.
Estragon
It's inevitable.
Vladimir
And his eyes!
Estragon
What about them?
Vladimir
Goggling out of his head.
Estragon
Looks at his last gasp to me.
Vladimir
It's not certain. (Pause.) Ask him a question.
Estragon
Would that be a good thing?
Vladimir
What do we risk?
Estragon
(Timidly.) Mister…
Vladimir
Louder.
Estragon
Mister…
Pozzo
Leave him in peace! (They turn towards Pozzo, who, having finished eating, wipes his mouth with the back of his hand.) Can't you see he wants to rest? Basket! (He strikes a match and begins to light his pipe, Estragon sees the chicken bones on the ground and stares at them greedily. As Lucky does not move Pozzo throws the match angrily away and jerks the rope.) Basket! (Lucky starts, almost falls, recovers his senses, advances, puts the bottle in the basket, returns to his place, Estragon stares at the bones, Pozzo strikes another match and lights his pipe.) What can you expect, it's not his job. (He pulls at his pipe, stretches out his legs.) Ah! That's better.
Estragon
(Timidly.) Please, sir…
Pozzo
What is it, my good man?
Estragon
Er… you've finished with the… er… you don't need the… er… bones, sir?
Vladimir
(Scandalized.) You couldn't have waited ?
Pozzo
No no, he does well to ask. Do I need the bones? (He turns them over with the end of his whip.) No, personally I do not need them any more, (Estragon takes a step towards the bones.) But… (Estragon stops short) …but in theory the bones go to the 24carrier. He is therefore the one to ask. (Estragon turns towards Lucky, hesitates.) Go on, go on, don't be afraid, ask him, he'll tell you.] (Estragon goes towards Lucky, stops before him.)
Estragon
Mister… excuse me, Mister…
Pozzo
You're being spoken to, pig! Reply! (To Estragon.) Try him again.
Estragon
Excuse me, Mister, the bones, you won't be wanting the bones?
Lucky looks long at Estragon.
Pozzo
(In raptures.) Mister! (Lucky bows his head.) Reply! Do you want them or don't you? (Silence of Lucky. To Estragon.) They're yours, (Estragon makes a dart at the bones, picks them up and begins to gnaw them.) I don't like it. I've never known him refuse a bone before. (He looks anxiously at Lucky.) Nice business it'd be if he fell sick on me! (He puffs at his pipe.)
Vladimir
(Exploding.) It's a scandal!
Silence. Flabbergasted, Estragon stops gnawing, looks at Pozzo and Vladimir in turn, Pozzo outwardly calm. Vladimir embarrassed.
Pozzo
(To Vladimir.) Are you alluding to anything in particular?
Vladimir
(Stutteringly resolute.) To treat a man… (Gesture towards Lucky) …like that… I think that… no… a human being… no… it's a scandal!
Estragon
(Not to be outdone.) A disgrace!
He resumes his gnawing.
Pozzo
You are severe. (To Vladimir.) What age are you, if it's not a rude question. (Silence.) Sixty? Seventy? (To Estragon.) What age would you say he was?
Estragon
Eleven.
Pozzo
I am impertinent. (He knocks out his pipe against the whip, gets up.) I must be getting on. Thank you for 25your society. (He reflects.) Unless I smoke another pipe before I go. What do you say? (They say nothing.) Oh, I'm only a small smoker, a very small smoker, I'm not in the habit of smoking two pipes one on top of the other, it makes (Hand to heart, sighing) my heart go pit-a-pat. (Silence.) It's the nicotine, one absorbs it in spite of one's precautions. (Sighs.) You know how it is. (Silence.) But perhaps you don't smoke? Yes? No? It's of no importance. (Silence.) But how am I to sit down now, without affectation, now that I have risen? Without appearing to – how shall I say – without appearing to falter. (To Vladimir.) I beg your pardon? (Silence.) Perhaps you didn't speak? (Silence.) It's of no importance. Let me see… (He reflects.)
Estragon
Ah! That's better.
He puts the bones in his pocket.
Vladimir
Let's go.
Estragon
So soon?
Pozzo
One moment. (He jerks the rope.) Stool! (He points with his whip. Lucky moves the stool.) More! There! (He sits down, Lucky goes back to his place.) Done it! (He fills his pipe.)
Vladimir
(Vehemently.) Let's go!
Pozzo
I hope I'm not driving you away. Wait a little longer, you'll never regret it.
Estragon
(Scenting charity.) We're in no hurry.
Pozzo
(Having lit his pipe.) The second is never so sweet… (He takes the pipe out of his mouth, contemplates it) …as the first, I mean. (He puts the pipe back in his mouth.) But it's sweet just the same.
Vladimir
I'm going.
Pozzo
He can no longer endure my presence. I am perhaps not particularly human, but who cares? (To Vladimir.) Think twice before you do anything rash. Suppose you go now, while it is still day, for there is no denying it is still day. (They all look up at the sky.) 26Good. (They stop looking at the sky.) What happens in that case – (He takes the pipe out of his mouth, examines it) – I'm out – (He relights his pipe) – in that case – (Puff) – in that case – (Puff) – what happens in that case to your appointment with this… Godet… Godot… Godin… anyhow you see who I mean, who has your future in his hands… (Pause) …at least your immediate future.
Vladimir
Who told you?
Pozzo
He speaks to me again! If this goes on much longer we'll soon be old friends.
Estragon
Why doesn't he put down his bags?
Pozzo
I too would be happy to meet him. The more people I meet the happier I become. From the meanest creature one departs wiser, richer, more conscious of one's blessings. Even you… (He looks at them ostentatiously in turn to make it clear they are both meant) …even you, who knows, will have added to my store.
Estragon
Why doesn't he put down his bags?
Pozzo
But that would surprise me.
Vladimir
You're being asked a question.
Pozzo
(Delighted.) A question! Who? What? A moment ago you were calling me sir, in fear and trembling. Now you're asking me questions. No good will come of this!
Vladimir
(To Estragon.) I think he's listening.
Estragon
(Circling about Lucky.) What?
Vladimir
You can ask him now. He's on the alert.
Estragon
Ask him what?
Vladimir
Why he doesn't put down his bags.
Estragon
I wonder.
Vladimir
Ask him, can't you?
Pozzo
(Who has followed these exchanges with anxious attention, fearing lest the question get lost.) You want to know why he doesn't put down his bags, as you call them?
27
Vladimir
That's it.
Pozzo
(To Estragon.) You are sure you agree with that?
Estragon
He's puffing like a grampus.
Pozzo
The answer is this. (To Estragon.) But stay still, I beg of you, you're making me nervous!
Vladimir
Here.
Estragon
What is it?
Vladimir
He's about to speak.
Estragon goes over beside Vladimir. Motionless, side by side, they wait.
Pozzo
Good. Is everybody ready? Is everybody looking at me? (He looks at Lucky, jerks the rope, Lucky raises his head.) Will you look at me, pig! (Lucky looks at him.) Good. (He puts his pipe in his pocket, takes out a little vaporizer and sprays his throat, puts back the vaporizer in his pocket, clears his throat, spits, takes out the vaporizer again, sprays his throat again, puts back the vaporizer in his pocket.) I am ready. Is everybody listening? Is everybody ready? (He looks at them all in turn, jerks the rope.) Hog! (Lucky raises his head.) I don't like talking in a vacuum. Good. Let me see.
He reflects.
Estragon
I'm going.
Pozzo
What was it exactly you wanted to know?
Vladimir
Why he –
Pozzo
(Angrily.) Don't interrupt me! (Pause. Calmer.) If we all speak at once we'll never get anywhere. (Pause.) What was I saying? (Pause. Louder.) What was I saying?
Vladimir mimics one carrying a heavy burden. Pozzo looks at him, puzzled.
Estragon
(Forcibly.) Bags. (He points at Lucky.) Why? Always hold. (He sags, panting.) Never put down. (He opens his hands, straightens up with relief.) Why?
28
Pozzo
Ah! Why couldn't you say so before? Why he doesn't make himself comfortable? Let's try and get it clear. Has he not the right to? Certainly he has. It follows that he doesn't want to. There's reasoning for you. And why doesn't he want to? (Pause.) Gentlemen, the reason is this.
Vladimir
(To Estragon.) Make a note of this.
Pozzo
He wants to impress me, so that I'll keep him.
Estragon
What?
Pozzo
Perhaps I haven't got it quite right. He wants to mollify me, so that I'll give up the idea of parting with him. No, that's not exactly it either.
Vladimir
You want to get rid of him?
Pozzo
He wants to cod me, but he won't.
Vladimir
You want to get rid of him?
Pozzo
He imagines that when I see how well he carries I'll be tempted to keep him on in that capacity.
Estragon
You've had enough of him?
Pozzo
In reality he carries like a pig. It's not his job.
Vladimir
You want to get rid of him?
Pozzo
He imagines that when I see him indefatigable I'll regret my decision. Such is his miserable scheme. As though I were short of slaves! (All three look at Lucky.) Atlas, son of Jupiter! (Silence.) Well, that's that, I think. Anything else? (Vaporizer.)
Vladimir
You want to get rid of him?
Pozzo
Remark that I might just as well have been in his shoes and he in mine. If chance had not willed otherwise. To each one his due.
Vladimir
You waagerrim?
Pozzo
I beg your pardon?
Vladimir
You want to get rid of him?
Pozzo
I do. But instead of driving him away as I might have done, I mean instead of simply kicking him out on his arse, in the goodness of my heart I am bringing him to the fair, where I hope to get a good price for 29him. The truth is you can't drive such creatures away. The best thing would be to kill them.
Lucky weeps.
Estragon
He's crying.
Pozzo
Old dogs have more dignity. (He proffers his handkerchief to Estragon.) Comfort him, since you pity him. (Estragon hesitates.) Come on. (Estragon takes the handkerchief) Wipe away his tears, he'll feel less forsaken.
Estragon hesitates.
Vladimir
Here, give it to me, I'll do it.
Estragon refuses to give the handkerchief. Childish gestures.
Pozzo
Make haste, before he stops, (Estragon approaches Lucky and makes to wipe his eyes, Lucky kicks him violently in the shins, Estragon drops the handkerchief, recoils, staggers about the stage howling with pain.) Hanky!
Lucky puts down bag and basket, picks up handkerchief, gives it to Pozzo, goes back to his place, picks up bag and basket.
Estragon
Oh the swine! (He pulls up the leg of his trousers.) He's crippled me!
Pozzo
I told you he didn't like strangers.
Vladimir
(To Estragon.) Show, (Estragon shows his leg. To Pozzo, angrily.) He's bleeding!
Pozzo
It's a good sign.
Estragon
(On one leg.) I'll never walk again!
Vladimir
(Tenderly.) I'll carry you. (Pause.) If necessary.
Pozzo
He's stopped crying. (To Estragon.) You have replaced him as it were. (Lyrically.) The tears of the world are a constant quantity. For each one who begins to weep, somewhere else another stops. The same is true of the laugh. (He laughs.) Let us not then speak ill of our generation, it is not any unhappier than its predecessors. (Pause.) Let us not speak well 30of it either. (Pause.) Let us not speak of it at all. (Pause. Judiciously.) It is true the population has increased.
Vladimir
Try and walk.
Estragon takes a few limping steps, stops before Lucky and spits on him, then goes and sits down on the mound.
Pozzo
Guess who taught me all these beautiful things. (Pause. Pointing to Lucky.) My Lucky!
Vladimir
(Looking at the sky.) Will night never come?
Pozzo
But for him all my thoughts, all my feelings, would have been of common things. (Pause. With extraordinary vehemence.) Professional worries! (Calmer.) Beauty, grace, truth of the first water, I knew they were all beyond me. So I took a knook.
Vladimir
(Startled from his inspection of the sky.) A knook?
Pozzo
That was nearly sixty years ago… (He consults his watch) …yes, nearly sixty. (Drawing himself up proudly.) You wouldn't think it to look at me, would you? Compared to him I look like a young man, no? (Pause.) Hat! (Lucky puts down the basket and takes off his hat. His long white hair falls about his face. He puts his hat under his arm and picks up the basket.) Now look, (Pozzo takes off his hat.He is completely bald. He puts on his hat again.) Did you see?
Vladimir
And now you turn him away? Such an old and faithful servant.
Estragon
Swine!
Pozzo more and more agitated.
Vladimir
After having sucked all the good out of him you chuck him away like a… like a banana skin. Really…
Pozzo
(Groaning, clutching his head.) I can't bear it… 31any longer… the way he goes on… you've no idea… it's terrible… he must go… (He waves his arms) …I'm going mad… (He collapses, his head in his hands) … I can't bear it… any longer… (Silence. All look at Pozzo.)
Vladimir
He can't bear it.
Estragon
Any longer.
Vladimir
He's going mad.
Estragon
It's terrible.
Vladimir
(To Lucky.) How dare you! It's abominable! Such a good master! Crucify him like that! After so many years! Really!
Pozzo
(Sobbing.) He used to be so kind… so helpful… and entertaining… my good angel… and now… he's killing me.
Estragon
(To Vladimir.) Does he want to replace him?
Vladimir
What?
Estragon
Does he want someone to take his place or not?
Vladimir
I don't think so.
Estragon
What?
Vladimir
I don't know.
Estragon
Ask him.
Pozzo
(Calmer.) Gentlemen, I don't know what came over me. Forgive me. Forget all I said. (More and more his old self.) I don't remember exactly what it was, but you may be sure there wasn't a word of truth in it. (Drawing himself up, striking his chest.) Do I look like a man that can be made to suffer? Frankly? (He rummages in his pockets.) What have I done with my pipe?
Vladimir
Charming evening we're having.
Estragon
Unforgettable.
Vladimir
And it's not over.
Estragon
Apparently not.
Vladimir
It's only beginning.
32
Estragon
It's awful.
Vladimir
Worse than the pantomime.
Estragon
The circus.
Vladimir
The music-hall.
Estragon
The circus.
Pozzo
What can I have done with that briar?
Estragon
He's a scream. He's lost his dudeen.
Laughs noisily.
Vladimir
I'll be back.
He hastens towards the wings.
Estragon
End of the corridor, on the left.
Vladimir
Keep my seat.
Exit Vladimir.
Pozzo
I've lost my Kapp and Peterson!
Estragon
(Convulsed with merriment.) He'll be the death of me!
Pozzo
(Looking up.) You didn't by any chance see – (He misses Vladimir.) Oh! He's gone! Without saying good-bye! How could he! He might have waited!
Estragon
He would have burst.
Pozzo
Oh! (Pause.) Oh well then of course in that case…
Estragon
Come here.
Pozzo
What for?
Estragon
You'll see.
Pozzo
You want me to get up?
Estragon
Quick! (Pozzo gets up and goes over beside Estragon. Estragon points off.) Look!
Pozzo
(Having put on his glasses.) Oh I say!
Estragon
It's all over.
Enter Vladimir, sombre. He shoulders Lucky out of his way, kicks over the stool, comes and goes agitatedly.
Pozzo
He's not pleased.
Estragon
(To Vladimir.) You missed a treat. Pity. (Vladimir halts, straightens the stool, comes and goes, calmer.)
33
Pozzo
He subsides. (Looking around.) Indeed all subsides. A great calm descends. (Raising his hand.) Listen! Pan sleeps.
Vladimir
Will night never come?
All three look at the sky.
Pozzo
You don't feel like going until it does?
Estragon
Well you see –
Pozzo
Why it's very natural, very natural. I myself in your situation, if I had an appointment with a Godin… Godet… Godot… anyhow, you see who I mean, I'd wait till it was black night before I gave up. (He looks at the stool.) I'd like very much to sit down, but I don't quite know how to go about it.
Estragon
Could I be of any help?
Pozzo
If you asked me perhaps.
Estragon
What?
Pozzo
If you asked me to sit down.
Estragon
Would that be a help?
Pozzo
I fancy so.
Estragon
Here we go. Be seated, sir, I beg of you.
Pozzo
No, no, I wouldn't think of it! (Pause. Aside.) Ask me again.
Estragon
Come come, take a seat, I beseech you, you'll get pneumonia.
Pozzo
You really think so?
Estragon
Why it's absolutely certain.
Pozzo
No doubt you are right. (He sits down.) Done it again! (Pause.) Thank you, dear fellow. (He consults his watch.) But I must really be getting along, if I am to observe my schedule.
Vladimir
Time has stopped.
Pozzo
(Cuddling his watch to his ear.) Don't you believe it, sir, don't you believe it. (He puts his watch back in his pocket.) Whatever you like, but not that.
Estragon
(To Pozzo.) Everything seems black to him today.
34
Pozzo
Except the firmament! (He laughs, pleased with this witticism.) But I see what it is, you are not from these parts, you don't know what our twilights can do. Shall I tell you? (Silence, Estragon is fiddling with his boot again, Vladimir with his hat.) I can't refuse you. (Vaporizer.) A little attention, if you please. (Vladimir and Estragon continue their fiddling, Lucky is half asleep, Pozzo cracks his whip feebly.) What's the matter with this whip? (He gets up and cracks it more vigorously, finally with success. Lucky jumps. Vladimiro hat, Estragone boot, Lucky's hat, fall to the ground, Pozzo throws down the whip.) Worn out, this whip. (He looks at Vladimir and Estragon.) What was I saying?
Vladimir
Let's go.
Estragon
But take the weight off your feet, I implore you, you'll catch your death.
Pozzo
True. (He sits down. To Estragon.) What is your name?
Estragon
Adam.
Pozzo
(Who hasn't listened.) Ah, yes! The night. (He raises his head.) But be a little more attentive, for pity's sake, otherwise we'll never get anywhere. (He looks at the sky.) Look. (All look at the sky except Lucky, who is dozing off again, Pozzo jerks the rope.) Will you look at the sky, pig! (Lucky looks at the sky.) Good, that's enough. (They stop looking at the sky.) What is there so extraordinary about it? Qua sky. It is pale and luminous like any sky at this hour of the day. (Pause.) In these latitudes. (Pause.) When the weather is fine. (Lyrical.) An hour ago (He looks at his watch, prosaic) roughly (Lyrical) after having poured forth ever since (He hesitates, prosaic) say ten o'clock in the morning (Lyrical) tirelessly torrents of red and white light it begins to lose its effulgence, to grow pale (Gestures of the two hands lapsing by 35stages) , pale, ever a little paler, a little paler until (Dramatic pause, ample gesture of the two hands flung wide apart) pppfff! finished! it comes to rest. But – (Hand raised in admonition) – but behind this veil of gentleness and peace night is charging (Vibrantly) and will burst upon us (Snaps his fingers) pop! like that! (His inspiration leaves him) just when we least expect it. (Silence. Gloomily.) That's how it is on this bitch of an earth.
Long silence.
Estragon
So long as one knows.
Vladimir
One can bide one's time.
Estragon
One knows what to expect.
Vladimir
No further need to worry.
Estragon
Simply wait.
Vladimir
We're used to it.
He picks up his hat, looks inside it, shakes it, puts it on.
Pozzo
How did you find me? (Vladimir and Estragon look at him blankly.) Good? Fair? Middling? Poor? Positively bad?
Vladimir
(First to understand.) Oh very good, very very good.
Pozzo
(To Estragon.) And you, sir?
Estragon
Oh, tray bong, tray tray tray bong.
Pozzo
(Fervently.) Bless you, gentlemen, bless you! (Pause.) I have such need of encouragement! (Pause.) I weakened a little towards the end, you didn't notice?
Vladimir
Oh, perhaps just a teeny weeny little bit.
Estragon
I thought it was intentional.
Pozzo
You see my memory is defective.
Silence.
Estragon
In the meantime nothing happens.
Pozzo
You find it tedious?
Estragon
Somewhat.
36
Pozzo
(To Vladimir.) And you, sir?
Vladimir
I've been better entertained.
Silence, Pozzo struggles inwardly.
Pozzo
Gentlemen, you have been… civil to me.
Estragon
Not at all.
Vladimir
What an idea!
Pozzo
Yes yes, you have been correct. So that I ask myself is there anything I can do in my turn for these honest fellows who are having such a dull, dull time.
Estragon
Even ten francs would be welcome.
Vladimir
We are not beggars!
Pozzo
Is there anything I can do, that's what I ask myself, to cheer them up? I have given them bones, I have talked to them about this and that, I have explained the twilight, admittedly. But is it enough, that's what tortures me, is it enough?
Estragon
Even five.
Vladimir
(To Estragon, indignantly.) That's enough!
Estragon
I couldn't accept less.
Pozzo
Is it enough? No doubt. But I am liberal. It's my nature. This evening. So much the worse for me. (He jerks the rope, Lucky looks at him.) For I shall suffer, no doubt about that. (He picks up the whip.) What do you prefer? Shall we have him dance, or sing, or recite, or think, or –
Estragon
Who?
Pozzo
Who! You know how to think, you two?
Vladimir
He thinks?
Pozzo
Certainly. Aloud. He even used to think very prettily once, I could listen to him for hours. Now… (He shudders.) So much the worse for me. Well, would you like him to think something for us?
Estragon
I'd rather he'd dance, it'd be more fun.
Pozzo
Not necessarily.
Estragon
Wouldn't it, Didi, be more fun?
Vladimir
I'd like well to hear him think.
37
Estragon
Perhaps he could dance first and think afterwards, if it isn't too much to ask him.
Vladimir
(To Pozzo.) Would that be possible?
Pozzo
By all means, nothing simpler. It's the natural order.
He laughs briefly.
Vladimir
Then let him dance.
Silence.
Pozzo
Do you hear, hog?
Estragon
He never refuses?
Pozzo
He refused once. (Silence.) Dance, misery! (Lucky puts down the basket, advances towards front, turns to Pozzo, Lucky dances. He stops.)
Estragon
Is that all?
Pozzo
Encore!
Lucky executes the same movements, stops.
Estragon
Pooh! I'd do as well myself. (He imitates Lucky, almost falls.) With a little practice.
Pozzo
He used to dance the farandole, the fling, the brawl, the jig, the fandango, and even the hornpipe. He capered. For joy. Now that's the best he can do. Do you know what he calls it?
Estragon
The Scapegoat's Agony.
Vladimir
The Hard Stool.
Pozzo
The Net. He thinks he's entangled in a net.
Vladimir
(Squirming like an aesthete.) There's something about it…
Lucky makes to return to his burdens.
Pozzo
Woaa!
Lucky stiffens.
Estragon
Tell us about the time he refused.
Pozzo
With pleasure, with pleasure. (He fumbles in his pockets.) Wait. (He fumbles.) What have I done with my spray? (He fumbles.) Well now isn't that… (He looks up, consternation on his features. Faintly.) I can't find my pulverizer!
Estragon
(Faintly.) My left lung is very weak! (He 38coughs feebly. In ringing tones.) But my right lung is as sound as a bell!
Pozzo
(Normal voice.) No matter! What was I saying. (He ponders.) Wait. (Ponders.) Well now isn't that… (He raises his head) . Help me!
Estragon
Wait!
Vladimir
Wait!
Pozzo
Wait!
All three take off their hats simultaneously, press their hands to their foreheads, concentrate.
Estragon
(Triumphantly.) Ah!
Vladimir
He has it.
Pozzo
(Impatient.) Well?
Estragon
Why doesn't he put down his bags?
Vladimir
Rubbish!
Pozzo
Are you sure?
Vladimir
Damn it, haven't you already told us!
Pozzo
I've already told you?
Estragon
He's already told us?
Vladimir
Anyway he has put them down.
Estragon
(Glance at Lucky.) So he has. And what of it?
Vladimir
Since he has put down his bags it is impossible we should have asked why he does not do so.
Pozzo
Stoutly reasoned!
Estragon
And why has he put them down?
Pozzo
Answer us that.
Vladimir
In order to dance.
Estragon
True!
Pozzo
True!
Silence. They put on their hats.
Estragon
Nothing happens, nobody comes, nobody goes, it's awful!
Vladimir
(To Pozzo.) Tell him to think.
Pozzo
Give him his hat.
Vladimir
His hat?
39
Pozzo
He can't think without his hat.
Vladimir
(To Estragon.) Give him his hat.
Estragon
Me! After what he did to me! Never!
Vladimir
I'll give it to him.
He does not move.
Estragon
(To Pozzo.) Tell him to go and fetch it.
Pozzo
It's better to give it to him.
Vladimir
I'll give it to him.
He picks up the hat and tenders it at arm's length to Lucky, who does not move.
Pozzo
You must put it on his head.
Estragon
(To Pozzo.) Tell him to take it.
Pozzo
It's better to put it on his head.
Vladimir
I'll put it on his head.
He goes round behind Lucky, approaches him cautiously, puts the hat on his head and recoils smartly, Lucky does not move. Silence.
Estragon
What's he waiting for?
Pozzo
Stand back! (Vladimir and Estragon move away from Lucky, Pozzo jerks the rope, Lucky looks at Pozzo.) Think, pig! (Pause, Lucky begins to dance.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Forward! (Lucky advances.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Think! (Silence.)
Lucky
On the other hand with regard to –
Pozzo
Stop! (Lucky stops.) Back! (Lucky moves back.) Stop! (Lucky stops.) Turn! (Lucky turns towards auditorium.) Think!
During Lucky's tirade the others react as follows: [1] Vladimir and Estragon all attention, Pozzo dejected and disgusted. [2] Vladimir and Estragon begin to protest, Pozzo's sufferings increase. [3] Vladimir and Estragon attentive again, Pozzo more and more agitated and groaning. [4] Vladimir and Estragon protest violently. Pozzo jumps up, pulls on the rope. General outcry. 40Lucky pulls on the rope, staggers, shouts his text. All three throw themselves on Lucky who struggles and shouts his text.
Lucky
Given the existence as uttered forth in the public works of Puncher and Wattmann of a personal God quaquaquaqua with white beard quaquaquaqua outside time without extension who from the heights of divine apathia divine athambia divine aphasia loves us dearly with some exceptions for reasons unknown but time will tell and suffers like the divine Miranda with those who for reasons unknown but time will tell are plunged in torment plunged in fire whose fire flames if that continues and who can doubt it will fire the firmament that is to say blast hell to heaven so blue still and calm so calm with a calm which even though intermittent is better than nothing but not so fast and considering what is more that as a result of the labours left unfinished crowned by the Acacacacademy of Anthropopopometry of Essy-in-Possy of Testew and Cunard it is established beyond all doubt all other doubt than that which clings to the labours of men that as a result of the labours unfinished of Testew and Cunard it is established as hereinafter but not so fast for reasons unknown that as a result of the public works of Puncher and Wattmann it is established beyond all doubt that in view of the labours of Fartov and Belcher left unfinished for reasons unknown of Testew and Cunard left unfinished it is established what many deny that man in Possy of Testew and Cunard that man in Essy that man in short that man in brief in spite of the strides of alimentation and defecation is seen to waste and pine waste and pine and concurrently simultaneously what is more for reasons unknown in spite of the strides of physical culture the practice of sports such as tennis football running 41cycling swimming flying floating riding gliding conating camogie skating tennis of all kinds dying flying sports of all sorts autumn summer winter winter tennis of all kinds hockey of all sorts penicillin and succedanea in a word I resume and concurrently simultaneously for reasons unknown to shrink and dwindle in spite of the tennis I resume flying gliding golf over nine and eighteen holes tennis of all sorts in a word for reasons unknown in Feckham Peckham Fulham Clapham namely concurrently simultaneously what is more for reasons unknown but time will tell to shrink and dwindle I resume Fulham Clapham in a word the dead loss per caput since the death of Bishop Berkeley being to the tune of one inch four ounce per caput approximately by and large more or less to the nearest decimal good measure round figures stark naked in the stockinged feet in Connemara in a word for reasons unknown no matter what matter the facts are there and considering what is more much more grave that in the light of the labours lost of Steinweg and Peterman it appears what is more much more grave that in the light the light the light of the labours lost of Steinweg and Peterman that in the plains in the mountains by the seas by the rivers running water running fire the air is the same and then the earth namely the air and then the earth in the great cold the great dark the air and the earth abode of stones in the great cold alas alas in the year of their Lord six hundred and something the air the earth the sea the earth abode of stones in the great deeps the great cold on sea on land and in the air I resume for reasons unknown in spite of the tennis the facts are there but time will tell I resume alas alas on on in short in fine on on abode of stones who can doubt it I resume but not so fast I resume the skull to shrink and waste and concurrently 42simultaneously what is more for reasons unknown in spite of the tennis on on the beard the flames the tears the stones so blue so calm alas alas on on the skull the skull the skull the skull in Connemara in spite of the tennis the labours abandoned left unfinished graver still abode of stones in a word I resume alas alas abandoned unfinished the skull the skull in Connemara in spite of the tennis the skull alas the stones Cunard (Mêlée, final vociferations) tennis… the stones… so calm… Cunard… unfinished…
Pozzo
His hat!
Vladimir seizes Lucky's hat. Silence of Lucky. He falls. Silence. Panting of the victors.
Estragon
Avenged!
Vladimir examines the hat, peers inside it.
Pozzo
Give me that! (He snatches the hat from Vladimir, throws it on the ground, tramples on it.) There's an end to his thinking!
Vladimir
But will he able to walk?
Pozzo
Walk or crawl! (He kicks Lucky.) Up pig!
Estragon
Perhaps he's dead.
Vladimir
You'll kill him.
Pozzo
Up scum! (He jerks the rope.) Help me!
Vladimir
How?
Pozzo
Raise him up!
Vladimir and Estragon hoist Lucky to his feet, support him an instant, then let him go. He falls.
Estragon
He's doing it on purpose!
Pozzo
You must hold him. (Pause.) Come on, come on, raise him up!
Estragon
To hell with him!
Vladimir
Come on, once more.
Estragon
What does he take us for? (They raise Lucky, hold him up.)
Pozzo
Don't let him go! (Vladimir and Estragon totter.) Don't move! (Pozzo fetches bag and basket 43and brings them towards Lucky.) Hold him tight! (He puts the bag in Lucky's hand, Lucky drops it immediately.) Don't let him go! (He puts back the bag in Lucky's hand. Gradually, at the feel of the bag, Lucky recovers his senses and his fingers close round the handle.) Hold him tight! (As before with basket.) Now! You can let him go. (Vladimir and Estragon move away from Lucky, who totters, reels, sags, but succeeds in remaining on his feet, bag and basket in his hands, Pozzo steps back, cracks his whip.) Forward! (Lucky totters forward.) Back! (Lucky totters back.) Turn! (Lucky turns.) Done it! He can walk. (Turning towards Vladimir and Estragon.) Thank you gentlemen, and let me… (He fumbles in his pockets) … let me wish you… (Fumbles) … wish you… (Fumbles) … what have I done with my watch? (Fumbles.) A genuine half-hunter, gentlemen, with deadbeat escapement! (Sobbing.) 'Twas my granpa gave it to me! (He searches on the ground, Vladimir and Estragon likewise, Pozzo turns over with his foot the remains of Lucky's hat.) Well now, isn't that just –
Vladimir
Perhaps it's in your fob.
Pozzo
Wait! (He doubles up in an attempt to apply his ear to his stomach, listens. Silence.) I hear nothing. (He beckons them to approach. Vladimir and Estragon go towards him, bend over his stomach.) Surely one should hear the tick-tick.
Vladimir
Silence!
All listen, bent double.
Estragon
I hear something.
Pozzo
Where?
Vladimir
It's the heart.
Pozzo
(Disappointed.) Damnation!
Vladimir
Silence!
Estragon
Perhaps it has stopped.
44
They straighten up.
Pozzo
Which of you smells so bad?
Estragon
He has stinking breath and I have stinking feet.
Pozzo
I must go.
Estragon
And your half-hunter?
Pozzo
I must have left it at the manor.
Silence.
Estragon
Then adieu.
Pozzo
Adieu.
Vladimir
Adieu.
Pozzo
Adieu.
Silence. No one moves.
Vladimir
Adieu.
Pozzo
Adieu.
Estragon
Adieu.
Silence.
Pozzo
And thank you.
Vladimir
Thank you.
Pozzo
Not at all.
Estragon
Yes yes.
Pozzo
No no.
Vladimir
Yes yes.
Estragon
No no.
Silence.
Pozzo
I don't seem to be able… (Long hesitation) … to depart.
Estragon
Such is life.
Pozzo turns, moves away from Lucky towards the wings, paying out the rope as he goes.
Vladimir
You're going the wrong way.
Pozzo
I need a running start. (Having come to the end of the rope, i.e. off stage, he stops, turns, and cries.) Stand back! (Vladimir and Estragon stand back, look towards Pozzo. Crack of whip.) On! On!
Estragon
On!
45
Vladimir
On!
Lucky moves off.
Pozzo
Faster!
(He appears, crosses the stage preceded by Lucky. Vladimir and Estragon wave their hats. Exit Lucky.) On! On! (On the point of disappearing in his turn he stops and turns. The rope tautens. Noise of Lucky falling off.) Stool! (Vladimir fetches stool and gives it to Pozzo, who throws it to Lucky.) Adieu.
Vladimir
Estragon
(Waving.) Adieu! Adieu!
(Waving.) Adieu! Adieu!
Pozzo
Up! Pig! (Noise of Lucky getting up.) On! (Exit Pozzo.) Faster! On! Adieu! Pig! Yip! Adieu! (Long silence.)
Vladimir
That passed the time.
Estragon
It would have passed in any case.
Vladimir
Yes, but not so rapidly.
Pause.
Estragon
What do we do now?
Vladimir
I don't know.
Estragon
Let's go.
Vladimir
We can't.
Estragon
Why not?
Vladimir
We're waiting for Godot.
Estragon
(Despairingly.) Ah!
Pause.
Vladimir
How they've changed!
Estragon
Who?
Vladimir
Those two.
Estragon
That's the idea, let's make a little conversation.
Vladimir
Haven't they?
Estragon
What?
Vladimir
Changed.
Estragon
Very likely. They all change. Only we can't.
Vladimir
Likely! It's certain. Didn't you see them?
46
Estragon
I suppose I did. But I don't know them.
Vladimir
Yes you do know them.
Estragon
No I don't know them.
Vladimir
We know them, I tell you. You forget everything. (Pause. To himself.) Unless they're not the same…
Estragon
Why didn't they recognize us then?
Vladimir
That means nothing. I too pretended not to recognize them. And then nobody ever recognizes us.
Estragon
Forget it. What we need – Ow! (Vladimir does not react.) Ow!
Vladimir
(To himself.) Unless they're not the same…
Estragon
Didi! It's the other foot!
He goes hobbling towards the mound.
Vladimir
Unless they're not the same…
Boy
(Off.) Mister!
Estragon halts. Both look towards the voice.
Estragon
Off we go again.
Vladimir
Approach, my child.
Enter Boy, timidly. He halts.
Boy
Mister Albert… ?
Vladimir
Yes.
Estragon
What do you want?
Vladimir
Approach.
The Boy does not move.
Estragon
(Forcibly.) Approach when you're told, can't you?
The Boy advances timidly, halts.
Vladimir
What is it?
Boy
Mr Godot…
Vladimir
Obviously… (Pause.) Approach.
Estragon
(Violently.) Will you approach! (The Boy advances timidly.) What kept you so late?
Vladimir
You have a message from Mr Godot?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
Well, what is it?
47
Estragon
What kept you so late?
The Boy looks at them in turn, not knowing to which he should reply.
Vladimir
(To Estragon.) Let him alone.
Estragon
(Violently.) You let me alone! (Advancing, to the Boy.) Do you know what time it is?
Boy
(Recoiling.) It's not my fault, sir.
Estragon
And whose is it? Mine?
Boy
I was afraid, sir.
Estragon
Afraid of what? Of us? (Pause.) Answer me!
Vladimir
I know what it is, he was afraid of the others.
Estragon
How long have you been here?
Boy
A good while, sir.
Vladimir
You were afraid of the whip.
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
The roars.
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
The two big men.
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
Do you know them?
Boy
No, sir.
Vladimir
Are you a native of these parts? (Silence.) Do you belong to these parts?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Estragon
That's all a pack of lies. (Shaking the Boy by the arm.) Tell us the truth.
Boy
(Trembling.) But it is the truth, sir!
Vladimir
Will you let him alone! What's the matter with you? (Estragon releases the Boy, moves away, covering his face with his hands. Vladimir and the Boy observe him. Estragon drops his hands. His face is convulsed.) What's the matter with you?
Estragon
I'm unhappy.
Vladimir
Not really! Since when?
Estragon
I'd forgotten.
Vladimir
Extraordinary the tricks that memory plays! 48(Estragon tries to speak, renounces, limps to his place, sits down and begins to take off his boots. To Boy.) Well?
Boy
Mr Godot-
Vladimir
I've seen you before, haven't I?
Boy
I don't know, sir.
Vladimir
You don't know me?
Boy
No, sir.
Vladimir
It wasn't you came yesterday?
Boy
No, sir.
Vladimir
This is your first time?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Silence.
Vladimir
Words, words. (Pause.) Speak.
Boy
(In a rush.) Mr Godot told me to tell you he won't come this evening but surely tomorrow.
Silence.
Vladimir
Is that all?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Silence.
Vladimir
You work for Mr Godot?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
What do you do?
Boy
I mind the goats, sir.
Vladimir
Is he good to you?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
He doesn't beat you?
Boy
No, sir, not me.
Vladimir
Whom does he beat?
Boy
He beats my brother, sir.
Vladimir
Ah, you have a brother?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
What does he do?
Boy
He minds the sheep, sir.
Vladimir
And why doesn't he beat you?
Boy
I don't know, sir.
49
Vladimir
He must be fond of you.
Boy
I don't know, sir.
Silence.
Vladimir
Does he give you enough to eat? (The Boy hesitates.) Does he feed you well?
Boy
Fairly well, sir.
Vladimir
You're not unhappy? (The Boy hesitates.) Do you hear me?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
Well?
Boy
I don't know, sir.
Vladimir
You don't know if you're unhappy or not?
Boy
No, sir.
Vladimir
You're as bad as myself. (Silence.) Where do you sleep?
Boy
In the loft, sir.
Vladimir
With your brother?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Vladimir
In the hay?
Boy
Yes, sir.
Silence.
Vladimir
All right, you may go.
Boy
What am I to say to Mr Godot, sir?
Vladimir
Tell him… (He hesitates) … tell him you saw us. (Pause.) You did see us, didn't you?
Boy
Yes, sir.
He steps back, hesitates, turns and exit running. The light suddenly fails. In a moment it is night. The moon rises at back, mounts in the sky, stands still, shedding a pale light on the scene.
Vladimir
At last! (Estragon gets up and goes towards Vladimir, a boot in each hand. He puts them down at the edge of stage, straightens and contemplates the moon.) What are you doing?
Estragon
Pale for weariness.
Vladimir
Eh?
50
Estragon
Of climbing heaven and gazing on the likes of us.
Vladimir
Your boots. What are you doing with your boots?
Estragon
(Turning to look at the boots.) I'm leaving them there. (Pause.) Another will come, just as… as… as me, but with smaller feet, and they'll make him happy.
Vladimir
But you can't go barefoot!
Estragon
Christ did.
Vladimir
Christ! What's Christ got to do with it? You're not going to compare yourself to Christ!
Estragon
All my life I've compared myself to him.
Vladimir
But where he lived it was warm, it was dry!
Estragon
Yes. And they crucified quick.
Silence.
Vladimir
We've nothing more to do here.
Estragon
Nor anywhere else.
Vladimir
Ah Gogo, don't go on like that. Tomorrow everything will be better.
Estragon
How do you make that out?
Vladimir
Did you not hear what the child said?
Estragon
No.
Vladimir
He said that Godot was sure to come tomorrow. (Pause.) What do you say to that?
Estragon
Then all we have to do is to wait on here.
Vladimir
Are you mad? We must take cover. (He takes Estragon by the arm.) Come on.
He draws Estragon after him. Estragon yields, then resists. They halt.
Estragon
(Looking at the tree.) Pity we haven't got a bit of rope.
Vladimir
Come on. It's cold.
He draws Estragon after him. As before.
Estragon
Remind me to bring a bit of rope tomorrow.
Vladimir
Yes. Come on.
51
He draws him after him. As before.
Estragon
How long have we been together all the time now?
Vladimir
I don't know. Fifty years perhaps.
Estragon
Do you remember the day I threw myself into the Rhône?
Vladimir
We were grape-harvesting.
Estragon
You fished me out.
Vladimir
That's all dead and buried.
Estragon
My clothes dried in the sun.
Vladimir
There's no good harking back on that. Come on.
He draws him after him. As before.
Estragon
Wait.
Vladimir
I'm cold!
Estragon
Wait! (He moves away from Vladimir.) I wonder if we wouldn't have been better off alone, each one for himself. (He crosses the stage and sits down on the mound.) We weren't made for the same road.
Vladimir
(Without anger.) It's not certain.
Estragon
No, nothing is certain.
Vladimir slowly crosses the stage and sits down beside Estragon.
Vladimir
We can still part, if you think it would be better.
Estragon
It's not worth while now.
Silence.
Vladimir
No, it's not worth while now.
Silence.
Estragon
Well, shall we go?
Vladimir
Yes, let's go.
They do not move.
CURTAIN